---
title: "Computer Addiction"
author: "TODO"
date: "2021-06-29"
output:
  blogdown::html_page:
    toc: true
    fig_width: 6
    dev: "svg"
---

Computer Addiction Module

Module Summary

 

**Ethics background** required: Familiarity with the virtue ethics,
deontological, and utilitarian ethical frameworks would be helpful. They
are briefly reviewed for those who need the information

**Subject matter** referred to in this module:

**Placement** in overall ethics curriculum:

> Academic year: Junior or Senior courses. Good candidate for course
> that covers software engineering.

            Recommended previous modules: First year curriculum

            Recommended follow-up modules: Nothing specific

**Time** required:

* Before class: 1 day technology fast, 10 minute reflection writeup

* In class: 30 minutes

**Learning objectives**:

-   Have an experience of how their own compulsive device-use habits
    > affect their life.

-   Understand the techniques used in making software products
    > addictive.

-   Understand and critique the motivations for making a product
    > addictive.

-   Explore the importance of supporting full human agency in the users
    > of their software. (Manipulation, human dignity)

-   Identify alternative business models that don't rely on compulsively
    > habit-forming use.

**Module overview**:

[Ethical issues to be considered]{.ul}: User behavior modification,
human dignity

[Exercise flow:]{.ul}

-   Targeted technology fast

-   Reflection on targeted technology fast

-   View a video on building intentionally habit-forming software
    > services.

-   Discuss these techniques and the ethics of intentional psychological
    > manipulation (both positive and negative).

-   Discuss how can virtue ethics, deontological ethics, or utilitarian
    > ethics bring insight to the ethicality of this approach.

-   Consider a product that was found to be addictive in the first
    > activity: What alternatives can be imagined that would keep the
    > product useful, but less addictive?

**Preparation:** Read the entire module and print/post copies of
reliability scenarios to be distributed to groups. The technology fast
activity should be assigned prior to the lesson.

Instructors Guide

**Lesson plan**

[Technology Fast Homework]{.ul}

1 week before the discussion, hand out the following activity prompt

> "Please choose one day this week where you will \"give up\" (entirely
> refrain from using) some tech device, app, or activity for just one
> day (eg. social media, gaming, texting etc.). The activity should be
> one that you use regularly in your daily life, but not one that would
> imperil your academic success in other courses. In your reading
> response, use your \"personal reflection\" section to comment on the
> experience of this small \"technology fast\". Was it difficult to do?
> How did it make you feel? What did you find your thoughts turning to?
> Would you consider making a \"technology fast\" part of your regular
> life rhythms? What is it about the design of this product that causes
> it to feel so compelling?"

-   Student should submit their choice of particular technological
    > activity and a particular day *before* the fast.

-   Student should complete the technology fast and submit their
    > reflection write-up at least one day prior to the class
    > discussion.

[In-class Activity (30 min)]{.ul}

(5 minutes) Invite student comments on the results of the technology
fast.

(2 minutes) Watch the following video, promoting a book on how to make
software habit-forming:

[[https://youtu.be/qWEldj_jJ9E]{.ul}](https://youtu.be/qWEldj_jJ9E)

> (For a longer treatment of this topic, you may want to consider the
> documentary The Social Dilemma.)

(10 minutes) Discuss both the techniques described in the promotion, and
the ethics of using those techniques. Draw out from the students the
situations in which these techniques may be appropriate, and those in
which they would be inappropriate.

Have the students identify which ethical frameworks they are using to
make these judgements. (Virtue, deontological, utilitarian)

(10 minutes) Broadening the discussion

Virtue Ethics:

What virtues are applicable when confronted with this issue?

How are habits and virtue linked?

Deontological Ethics:

Are there rules in the ACM code of ethics that would address this topic?

Utilitarian Ethics:

Who are the stakeholders? Who benefits? Who is negatively affected?

What are the societal impacts if this technology becomes ubiquitous?

If your boss asked you to design software using addictive techniques,
how would you respond? (What other design choices or even business
models could be suggested that don't have these concerns? How could a
different design give the user of the product more control over their
own behavior?)

[Assessment]{.ul} (to be included at a later date on a quiz, paper, or
exam to determine if LOs were reached)

-   What ideas did the class come up with for responses to the boss's
    > request to develop an addictive product?

-   What changes are you considering in your life after your technology
    > fast and/or hearing comments from your classmates?

-   Using one or more of the Ethical Frameworks, describe why designing
    > products to be intentionally addictive is ethically problematic?

 

**Student handouts are attached**

U.S Patriot Missile Defense Scenario

In February of 1991, a U.S. Patriot missile defense system in Saudi
Arabia, failed to detect an attack on an Army barracks. A government
report found that a software problem led to an inaccurate tracking
calculation that became worse the longer the system operated.

[[https://raygun.com/blog/costly-software-errors-history/]{.ul}](https://raygun.com/blog/costly-software-errors-history/)

The general definition of the word "reliable" according to Webster's
Dictionary is "giving the same result on successive trials."

According to ANSI/IEEE, software reliability is defined as: the
probability of failure-free software operation for a specified period of
time in a specified environment.

Answer the following questions with your group

-   According to the definitions, in what way was the software in your
    > scenario unreliable?

-   The next question relates to the ethicality of unreliable software.
    > Determining the ethicality of something is sometimes hard to do.
    > If you have studied ethics previously, you may have a method. If
    > not, here are some things to consider about your scenario:

    -   Does the unreliability of the software you are considering cause
        > moral values (virtues) of you or your society to be violated?
        > Virtues include:

        -   Honesty, integrity, compassion, courage, excellence,
            > dignity, justice, kindness, patience, quality,
            > perseverance, respect, service, transparency, etc.

    -   Does the unreliability of the software you are considering cause
        > harm to people without producing great value to many more? (a
        > tradeoff)

    -   Is there a rule that would be violated by allowing this software
        > to continue to be used knowing its faults?

Be prepared to discuss your answers with the whole group

U.K.'s Child Support Agency Scenario

In 2004, EDS introduced a highly complex IT system to the U.K.'s Child
Support Agency (CSA). At the exact same time, the Department for Work
and Pensions (DWP) decided to restructure the entire agency. The two
pieces of software were completely incompatible, and irreversible errors
were introduced as a result. The system somehow managed to overpay 1.9
million people, underpay another 700,000, had US\$7 billion in
uncollected child support payments, a backlog of 239,000 cases, 36,000
new cases "stuck" in the system, and has cost the UK taxpayers over
US\$1 billion.

[[https://raygun.com/blog/costly-software-errors-history/]{.ul}](https://raygun.com/blog/costly-software-errors-history/)

The general definition of the word "reliable" according to Webster's
Dictionary is "giving the same result on successive trials."

According to ANSI/IEEE, software reliability is defined as: the
probability of failure-free software operation for a specified period of
time in a specified environment.

Answer the following questions with your group

-   According to the definitions, in what way was the software in your
    > scenario unreliable?

-   The next question relates to the ethicality of unreliable software.
    > Determining the ethicality of something is sometimes hard to do.
    > If you have studied ethics previously, you may have a method. If
    > not, here are some things to consider about your scenario:

    -   Does the unreliability of the software you are considering cause
        > moral values (virtues) of you or your society to be violated?
        > Virtues include:

        -   Honesty, integrity, compassion, courage, excellence,
            > dignity, justice, kindness, patience, quality,
            > perseverance, respect, service, transparency, etc.

    -   Does the unreliability of the software you are considering cause
        > harm to people without producing great value to many more? (a
        > tradeoff)

    -   Is there a rule that would be violated by allowing this software
        > to continue to be used knowing its faults?

Be prepared to discuss your answers with the whole group

Y2K Problem Scenario

The Year 2000 problem, also known as the Y2K problem, the Millennium
bug, Y2K bug, the Y2K glitch, or Y2K, refers to events related to the
formatting and storage of calendar data for dates beginning in the year
2000. Problems were anticipated, and arose, because many programs
represented four-digit years with only the final two digits -- making
the year 2000 indistinguishable from 1900. The assumption of a
twentieth-century date in such programs could cause various errors, such
as the incorrect display of dates and the inaccurate ordering of
automated dated records or real-time events.

[[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Year_2000_problem]{.ul}](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Year_2000_problem)

The general definition of the word "reliable" according to Webster's
Dictionary is "giving the same result on successive trials."

According to ANSI/IEEE, software reliability is defined as: the
probability of failure-free software operation for a specified period of
time in a specified environment.

Answer the following questions with your group

-   According to the definitions, in what way was the software in your
    > scenario unreliable?

-   The next question relates to the ethicality of unreliable software.
    > Determining the ethicality of something is sometimes hard to do.
    > If you have studied ethics previously, you may have a method. If
    > not, here are some things to consider about your scenario:

    -   Does the unreliability of the software you are considering cause
        > moral values (virtues) of you or your society to be violated?
        > Virtues include:

        -   Honesty, integrity, compassion, courage, excellence,
            > dignity, justice, kindness, patience, quality,
            > perseverance, respect, service, transparency, etc.

    -   Does the unreliability of the software you are considering cause
        > harm to people without producing great value to many more? (a
        > tradeoff)

    -   Is there a rule that would be violated by allowing this software
        > to continue to be used knowing its faults?

Be prepared to discuss your answers with the whole group

NASA's Mars Climate Orbiter Scenario

On its mission to Mars in 1998 the Climate Orbiter spacecraft was
ultimately lost in space. Although the failure bemused engineers for
some time it was revealed that a sub contractor on the engineering team
failed to make a simple conversion from English units to metric. An
embarrassing lapse that sent the \$125 million craft fatally close to
Mars' surface after attempting to stabilize its orbit too low. Flight
controllers believe the spacecraft plowed into Mars' atmosphere where
the associated stresses crippled its communications, leaving it hurtling
on through space in an orbit around the sun.

[[https://raygun.com/blog/costly-software-errors-history/]{.ul}](https://raygun.com/blog/costly-software-errors-history/)

The general definition of the word "reliable" according to Webster's
Dictionary is "giving the same result on successive trials."

According to ANSI/IEEE, software reliability is defined as: the
probability of failure-free software operation for a specified period of
time in a specified environment.

Answer the following questions with your group

-   According to the definitions, in what way was the software in your
    > scenario unreliable?

-   The next question relates to the ethicality of unreliable software.
    > Determining the ethicality of something is sometimes hard to do.
    > If you have studied ethics previously, you may have a method. If
    > not, here are some things to consider about your scenario:

    -   Does the unreliability of the software you are considering cause
        > moral values (virtues) of you or your society to be violated?
        > Virtues include:

        -   Honesty, integrity, compassion, courage, excellence,
            > dignity, justice, kindness, patience, quality,
            > perseverance, respect, service, transparency, etc.

    -   Does the unreliability of the software you are considering cause
        > harm to people without producing great value to many more? (a
        > tradeoff)

    -   Is there a rule that would be violated by allowing this software
        > to continue to be used knowing its faults?

Be prepared to discuss your answers with the whole group

Ariane 5 Flight 501 Scenario

Europe's newest un-manned satellite-launching rocket reused working
software from its predecessor, the Ariane 4. Unfortunately, the Ariane
5's faster engines exploited a bug that was not found in previous
models. Thirty-six seconds into its maiden launch the rocket's engineers
hit the self destruct button following multiple computer failures. In
essence, the software had tried to cram a 64-bit number into a 16-bit
space. The resulting overflow conditions crashed both the primary and
backup computers (which were both running the exact same software). The
Ariane 5 had cost nearly \$8 billion to develop, and was carrying a
\$500 million satellite payload when it exploded.

[[https://raygun.com/blog/costly-software-errors-history/]{.ul}](https://raygun.com/blog/costly-software-errors-history/)

The general definition of the word "reliable" according to Webster's
Dictionary is "giving the same result on successive trials."

According to ANSI/IEEE, software reliability is defined as: the
probability of failure-free software operation for a specified period of
time in a specified environment.

Answer the following questions with your group

-   According to the definitions, in what way was the software in your
    > scenario unreliable?

-   The next question relates to the ethicality of unreliable software.
    > Determining the ethicality of something is sometimes hard to do.
    > If you have studied ethics previously, you may have a method. If
    > not, here are some things to consider about your scenario:

    -   Does the unreliability of the software you are considering cause
        > moral values (virtues) of you or your society to be violated?
        > Virtues include:

        -   Honesty, integrity, compassion, courage, excellence,
            > dignity, justice, kindness, patience, quality,
            > perseverance, respect, service, transparency, etc.

    -   Does the unreliability of the software you are considering cause
        > harm to people without producing great value to many more? (a
        > tradeoff)

    -   Is there a rule that would be violated by allowing this software
        > to continue to be used knowing its faults?

Be prepared to discuss your answers with the whole group

Heathrow Terminal 5 Opening Scenario

Just before the opening of Heathrow's Terminal 5 in the UK, staff tested
the brand new baggage handling system built to carry the vast amounts of
luggage checked in each day. Engineers tested the system thoroughly
before opening the Terminal to the public with over 12,000 test pieces
of luggage. It worked flawlessly on all test runs only to find on the
Terminal's opening day the system simply could not cope. It is thought
that "real life" scenarios such as removing a bag from the system
manually when a passenger had left an important item in their luggage,
had caused the entire system to become confused and shut down. Over the
following 10 days some 42,000 bags failed to travel with their owners,
and over 500 flights were cancelled.

[[https://www.computerworld.com/article/3412197/top-software-failures-in-recent-history.html]{.ul}](https://www.computerworld.com/article/3412197/top-software-failures-in-recent-history.html)

The general definition of the word "reliable" according to Webster's
Dictionary is "giving the same result on successive trials."

According to ANSI/IEEE, software reliability is defined as: the
probability of failure-free software operation for a specified period of
time in a specified environment.

Answer the following questions with your group

-   According to the definitions, in what way was the software in your
    > scenario unreliable?

-   The next question relates to the ethicality of unreliable software.
    > Determining the ethicality of something is sometimes hard to do.
    > If you have studied ethics previously, you may have a method. If
    > not, here are some things to consider about your scenario:

    -   Does the unreliability of the software you are considering cause
        > moral values (virtues) of you or your society to be violated?
        > Virtues include:

        -   Honesty, integrity, compassion, courage, excellence,
            > dignity, justice, kindness, patience, quality,
            > perseverance, respect, service, transparency, etc.

    -   Does the unreliability of the software you are considering cause
        > harm to people without producing great value to many more? (a
        > tradeoff)

    -   Is there a rule that would be violated by allowing this software
        > to continue to be used knowing its faults?

Be prepared to discuss your answers with the whole group

Financial Software Scenario

A customer using a financial software package preparing for an upcoming
client meeting. The financial advisor is reviewing his presentation and
recognizes that the investment earning for his client are showing a
negative value when he is certain that the investments have made a gain.
The financial advisor calls the software company asking if he has used
the software incorrectly or if there is a known error. The customer
service representative says that she is not aware of a known error, but
will ask the maintenance programmers to look into the problem. The
programmers had a very difficult time finding the bug, but a week later
they located it. Unfortunately, in the absence of the software, the
financial advisor had to reschedule and lost the client due to the
delay.

The general definition of the word "reliable" according to Webster's
Dictionary is "giving the same result on successive trials."

According to ANSI/IEEE, software reliability is defined as: the
probability of failure-free software operation for a specified period of
time in a specified environment.

Answer the following questions with your group

-   According to the definitions, in what way was the software in your
    > scenario unreliable?

-   The next question relates to the ethicality of unreliable software.
    > Determining the ethicality of something is sometimes hard to do.
    > If you have studied ethics previously, you may have a method. If
    > not, here are some things to consider about your scenario:

    -   Does the unreliability of the software you are considering cause
        > moral values (virtues) of you or your society to be violated?
        > Virtues include:

        -   Honesty, integrity, compassion, courage, excellence,
            > dignity, justice, kindness, patience, quality,
            > perseverance, respect, service, transparency, etc.

    -   Does the unreliability of the software you are considering cause
        > harm to people without producing great value to many more? (a
        > tradeoff)

    -   Is there a rule that would be violated by allowing this software
        > to continue to be used knowing its faults?

Be prepared to discuss your answers with the whole group

Accounting System Scenario

A computer company is writing the first stage of a more efficient
accounting system which will be used by the government and will save
taxpayers a considerable amount of money. A software engineer is asked
to design a user interface for the system. The accounting system and the
interface contain all of the functionality described in the
requirements. The system is installed, but the user interface is so hard
to use that the complaints of the customer\'s staff are heard by the
customer\'s upper level management. Because of these complaints, upper
level management will not invest any more money in the development of
the new accounting system and they go back to their original more
expensive system.

[[https://csciwww.etsu.edu/gotterbarn/artge2.htm]{.ul}](https://csciwww.etsu.edu/gotterbarn/artge2.htm)

The general definition of the word "reliable" according to Webster's
Dictionary is "giving the same result on successive trials."

According to ANSI/IEEE, software reliability is defined as: the
probability of failure-free software operation for a specified period of
time in a specified environment.

Answer the following questions with your group

-   According to the definitions, in what way was the software in your
    > scenario unreliable?

-   The next question relates to the ethicality of unreliable software.
    > Determining the ethicality of something is sometimes hard to do.
    > If you have studied ethics previously, you may have a method. If
    > not, here are some things to consider about your scenario:

    -   Does the unreliability of the software you are considering cause
        > moral values (virtues) of you or your society to be violated?
        > Virtues include:

        -   Honesty, integrity, compassion, courage, excellence,
            > dignity, justice, kindness, patience, quality,
            > perseverance, respect, service, transparency, etc.

    -   Does the unreliability of the software you are considering cause
        > harm to people without producing great value to many more? (a
        > tradeoff)

    -   Is there a rule that would be violated by allowing this software
        > to continue to be used knowing its faults?

Be prepared to discuss your answers with the whole group

Radar System Scenario

A computer company wrote a radar system for ships which identifies
incoming aircraft as friend or foe. A software engineer developed a user
interface which will display needed information. This information can be
used to determine if defensive action is necessary. The radar system and
the interface contain all of the functionality described in the
requirements. Although all of the information required was displayed, it
was not displayed in a way that was adequate for them to distinguish a
military attack plane from a commercial airliner. This contributed to
the loss of many lives.

[[https://csciwww.etsu.edu/gotterbarn/artge2.htm]{.ul}](https://csciwww.etsu.edu/gotterbarn/artge2.htm)

The general definition of the word "reliable" according to Webster's
Dictionary is "giving the same result on successive trials."

According to ANSI/IEEE, software reliability is defined as: the
probability of failure-free software operation for a specified period of
time in a specified environment.

Answer the following questions with your group

-   According to the definitions, in what way was the software in your
    > scenario unreliable?

-   The next question relates to the ethicality of unreliable software.
    > Determining the ethicality of something is sometimes hard to do.
    > If you have studied ethics previously, you may have a method. If
    > not, here are some things to consider about your scenario:

    -   Does the unreliability of the software you are considering cause
        > moral values (virtues) of you or your society to be violated?
        > Virtues include:

        -   Honesty, integrity, compassion, courage, excellence,
            > dignity, justice, kindness, patience, quality,
            > perseverance, respect, service, transparency, etc.

    -   Does the unreliability of the software you are considering cause
        > harm to people without producing great value to many more? (a
        > tradeoff)

    -   Is there a rule that would be violated by allowing this software
        > to continue to be used knowing its faults?

Be prepared to discuss your answers with the whole group

Junior Programmer Scenario

One of the main clients of ACME Programming Associates is Always
Airways. Always Airways has employed ACME to create simulators for
training their pilots on various aircraft. One simulator needs to be
updated because the 2020 version of commuter planes used by Always
contains an air circulation monitor that was not previously included on
the cockpit dashboard. The updated simulator needs to be ready for
training pilots next week. They are on a very strict timeline but the
only programmer available to ACME is Kim, a fairly new college graduate
who has only been with the company for 2 months and just finished her
training on the company's proprietary IDE. Since the addition of the
monitor to the dashboard should be a fairly simple change, Kim is
assigned to the job. Kim tested the addition to the best of her ability,
but did not realize that the units used for air circulation could
produce values up to 100 billion. Hence, when the simulator was used by
the pilots, negative numbers appeared.

According to ANSI/IEEE, software reliability is defined as: the
probability of failure-free software operation for a specified period of
time in a specified environment.

Answer the following questions with your group

-   According to the definitions, in what way was the software in your
    > scenario unreliable?

-   The next question relates to the ethicality of unreliable software.
    > Determining the ethicality of something is sometimes hard to do.
    > If you have studied ethics previously, you may have a method. If
    > not, here are some things to consider about your scenario:

    -   Does the unreliability of the software you are considering cause
        > moral values (virtues) of you or your society to be violated?
        > Virtues include:

        -   Honesty, integrity, compassion, courage, excellence,
            > dignity, justice, kindness, patience, quality,
            > perseverance, respect, service, transparency, etc.

    -   Does the unreliability of the software you are considering cause
        > harm to people without producing great value to many more? (a
        > tradeoff)

    -   Is there a rule that would be violated by allowing this software
        > to continue to be used knowing its faults?

Be prepared to discuss your answers with the whole group
