---
title: "Ethics in E-Commerce: Digital Nudging"
author: "Lori Carter"
date: "2021-07-21"
---

# Overview

**Ethics background** required: This module refers to the following
ethics frameworks: Virtue Ethics, Deontology, and Utilitarianism. Brief
descriptions of each are included in the take-home assignments so
professors and students who are not familiar with these approaches can
still complete the module. Using these frameworks reinforces what
students learned in the first year curriculum (if that was used).

**Subject matter** referred to in this module: E-Commerce, Databases,
Dark Patterns

**Placement** in overall ethics curriculum:

* Academic year: Years 2-4 in a Database or Software Engineering course

* Recommended previous modules: Ideally, students have completed the
  first year curriculum

* Recommended follow-up modules: No direct follow-up modules

**Time** required:

* Out of class: 30 minutes for students

    -   If students are not familiar with E-Commerce, students should
    complete the Introduction to E-Commerce exercise. To encourage
    preparation, questions are included in this exercise. 10 minutes

    -   Students explore the idea of dark patterns and digital nudging
    through a second assignment. Students are asked to find their own
    example of digital nudging to be shared with the class. 20 minutes

* In class: 15-20 minutes

    -   Professor shares some or all of student examples. Class discusses
    ways that a webpage content designer can present buying options to
    the consumer in an ethical manner, but that still provide the
    potential of increased revenue for the business represented.

**Timing suggestion:** Since this exercise has a more significant time
requirement outside of class, it could be used 
**when a professor needs to miss a class**. 
Alternatively, it could be used after an exam when
students do not have other homework.

**Learning objectives**:

-   Students are introduced to E-Commerce

-   Students are introduced to Dark Patterns (Digital Nudging)

-   Students practice applying three ethical frameworks in an effort to
    support the claim that digital nudging is very often unethical and
    articulating their conclusions

-   Students gain practice considering ethical ways to achieve the same
    goals and the often unethical digital nudging approach.


**Ethical dilemma or issue to be considered:**

This module looks at ethical considerations in E-Commerce. It explores,
using three different ethical frameworks, how pre-set choices on
webpages can "nudge" a person to choose options that are not in their
best interest. A dilemma to be considered here is the tension between a
company making money by encouraging customers to buy their product or to
upgrade and the resulting positive or negative experience for the
consumer. **Ethical issues include transparency and dignity.**

**Preparation:** 

* Read entire module. 
* Post 2 assignments online. 
* Print a class-based student handout for each student. 
* Collect examples of nudging provided by students in a way that can be presented
to the class.

**Flow**

-   Students complete E-Commerce (optional) and Digital Nudging
    exercises at home

-   Students send examples of digital nudging discovered online to
    professor

-   In class, after receiving examples of nudging, professor presents
    some/all examples to class

-   In class, professor leads a discussion of ways that the benefits of
    nudging could occur ethically

Instructors Guide

**Lesson plan**

[Introduction]{.ul} (to be presented to class either online or in class)

Buying and selling online, banking online, and other electronic
transactions are becoming more and more popular. As is often the case
with new technology, the way that E-Commerce has been used and exploited
could not be completely predicted, and has resulted in some ethical
issues. This module gives us the opportunity to explore and discuss some
of the ethical dilemmas and issues that exist with online buying and
selling in particular.

[Activity]{.ul}

-   Read the introduction to the students. Let them know that they have
    2 assignments to complete before the next class. Remind them that in
    addition to completing and submitting the assignments, they should
    send you a screenshot of an example of online digital nudging by
    your pre-determined deadline. The screenshot should also include a
    description of the nudging shown.

-   Students complete the E-commerce (at discretion of professor) and
    digital nudging assignments that the professor has provided online.

-   During the class after which students have turned in the assignment,
    the professor should display to the class some or all of the
    examples.

-   Students complete the in-class handout (attached) in a small group.

[Reflection]{.ul}

As a class, review the answers in the handout. **Here are some ideas for
the professor,** which can be reviewed as the students do their work.

-   From the point of view of a business, what is the purpose of digital
    nudging -- what are they trying to achieve? Give examples.

    -   *Students will hopefully see that they are trying to increase
        revenue*

-   Is this purpose (or purposes) inherently unethical? Why or why not?

    -   *Students should see that it is not. Businesses need to make
        money to pay employees.*

-   What makes the digital nudging examples shown unethical? Use one of
    the ethical frameworks from the assignment to support your
    conclusion. (If this reflection is completed in small groups first,
    assign each group a particular framework to present)

    -   *Virtue ethics: These nudging examples violate the moral value
        > of honesty (ethical issue transparency) and human dignity
        > (wanting the best for others and not trying to take advantage
        > or trick them)*

    -   *Deontology: Violates "golden rule" -- Do unto others as you
        > would have them do unto you. Another rule might be that "the
        > customer comes first". Most of this nudging is not in the best
        > interest of the customer.*

    -   *Utilitarianism: The stakeholders would be the business, the
        > business employees, and the consumers. The largest group would
        > be the consumer, and these nudging practices are not in the
        > best interest of the consumer.*

-   Suggest ways that a company might increase their revenue through
    E-Commerce in a manner that removes these unethical aspects.

    -   *Honestly reporting the benefits of upgrading a product with a
        > transparent price consideration. It is quite possible that the
        > consumer would like to take advantage of the upgrade if they
        > feel that they are being treated fairly*

    -   *Give options without any preset choice*

    -   *Speak in plain, concise language about options*

    -   *Use your marketing creativity to extol the virtues of a product
        > to the correct audience. Do the research!*

[Assessment]{.ul} (to be included at a later date on a quiz, paper, or
exam to determine if learning objectives were reached)

-   Give an example of a dark pattern.

-   Use an argument from virtue ethics as to why this example is
    unethical

-   Create a rule that could be included in a code of ethics for a
    company that would keep company marketers from using these patterns
    and still remaining in good standing with the company

E-Commerce Assignment

Learn the Basics About E-Commerce **BY [AJEET
KHURANA](https://www.thebalancesmb.com/ajeet-khurana-1141298)**

Business transactions that take place on the internet are called
e-commerce, short for \"[electronic
commerce](https://www.thebalancesmb.com/the-secret-to-effectively-managing-an-ecommerce-business-1141726).\"​
Popular examples of e-commerce generally involve buying and [selling
online](https://www.thebalancesmb.com/selling-unique-products-could-be-your-differentiator-1141674),
but the e-commerce universe contains other types of activities as well.
Basically, any form of business transaction conducted electronically can
be referred to as e-commerce. Those involved in the transactions can
represent multiple combinations of customers, businesses, vendors or
other suppliers, or government agencies.
[E-commerce](https://www.thebalancesmb.com/advantages-of-ecommerce-1141610) has
experienced considerable growth since the dawn of the internet as a
commercial enterprise. It eliminates time and geographical limitations
and can streamline operations and lower costs.

**Growth**

In the decade ending with the first quarter of 2018, e-commerce sales in
the U.S. grew from less than 4 percent to more than 9 percent of all
retail sales, according to [U.S. Census Bureau
statistics](https://www.census.gov/retail/mrts/www/data/pdf/ec_current.pdf).
In total dollars, retail outlets in the U.S. made about \$123.7 billion
worth of online sales during the first quarter of 2018, compared to
about \$1.3 trillion worth of total
sales. [Statista](https://www.statista.com/statistics/379112/e-commerce-share-of-retail-sales-in-us/) projects
e-commerce sales to grow to nearly 14 percent of all U.S. retail sales
by 2021.

**Business-to-Consumer (B2C)**

[B2C](https://www.thebalancesmb.com/b2c-business-to-consumer-sales-1794400) transactions
are what often come to mind when people think of e-commerce. One of the
most popular examples of of B2C transactions is buying and selling goods
on the internet. Many businesses have virtual storefronts that are the
online equivalents of their retail outlets. Some businesses have no
physical storefronts at all---only websites. Buyers browse and purchase
products with mouse clicks. Though Amazon.com is not the pioneer of
online shopping, it is arguably the most famous online shopping
destination.

The online retailer\'s quarterly net revenue has grown from just more
than \$4 billion in the first quarter of 2008 to more than \$51 billion
in the first quarter of 2018, according
to [Statista](https://www.statista.com/statistics/273963/quarterly-revenue-of-amazoncom/).

One of the biggest drivers of e-commerce has been the interfacing of
websites with bank accounts---and by extension, credit cards. Today it
is possible to perform the entire gamut of banking operations without
visiting a physical bank branch. This makes it easy to pay for products
online, allowing for secure electronic payments via credit cards, debit
cards, or gift cards, which is far more efficient than writing and
mailing checks.

**M-Commerce**

M-commerce is short for \"mobile commerce.\" This is largely a
subsection of B2C transactions, but the rapid penetration of mobile
devices with internet access has opened new avenues of e-commerce for
retailers and their customers. M-commerce generally involves e-commerce
taking place on mobile phones.

One of the most common examples of m-commerce is electronic ticketing.
Air tickets, movie tickets, train tickets, play tickets, tickets to
sporting events, and just about any kind of tickets can be booked online
or through mobile apps. Instead of receiving a paper ticket, buyers
download an electronic version of the ticket that can be scanned just
like paper tickets. While electronic ticketing does not eliminate lines
at entry points, it does reduce long lines for ticket purchases or
picking up tickets at a will-call booth.

**F-Commerce**

F-commerce is short for \"Facebook commerce.\" The popular social media
site provides a captive audience to transact business, and many small
businesses rely more on their social media presence than they do on
traditional websites. This type of e-commerce also is a subsection of
B2C transactions and closely related to m-commerce.

Many Facebook users access the site via their phones, and businesses
often provide links to online purchasing options through their pages and
posts. This type of commerce also extends to other social media, such as
Instagram and Twitter.

*https://www.thebalancesmb.com/let-s-ask-the-basic-question-what-is-ecommerce-1141599*

**Questions on E-Commerce (5 points)**

E-commerce generally consists of a front end interface to the user and a
database. The front end would be a webpage such as what you see with
Amazon, Facebook, or Instagram and is run on your computer by your
browser. The database that contains the product information, pictures,
and messages along with the algorithms to decide what is displayed, what
ads are run, what information is collected etc. is stored on a server.
PHP (or possibly javascript) is used to enable the calculations and
interactions and is generally run on the server.

What is e-commerce? Describe in your own words (2)

What are the 2 parts of an e-commerce system? (1)

Under what category of e-commerce would Amazon.com fall. Why? (2)

Digital Nudging Assignment

**Ethics in E-Commerce**

E-Commerce is a growing phenomenon. Daily, we buy and sell online,
complete complex banking transactions or just send money to a friend.
Traditionally, the ethical considerations of such activities have
focused on security and privacy. Lately, people understand that our
considerations need to be expanded. Is it ethical to encourage impulse
buying -- especially for someone with limited resources? Is it ethical
to include user agreements with these transactional tools that are too
long or too complex for people to actually read?

This exercise focuses on an area of webpage/marketing design called dark
patterns or digital nudging. Start by reading the article below and then
answer the questions that follow.

**13 examples of dark patterns in ecommerce checkouts**

**By [[Ben Davis]{.ul}](https://econsultancy.com/ben-davis/)  April 6th
2017**

**Dark patterns are deceptive parts of a digital user interface,
designed to trick the user into making a decision that benefits the
business involved.**

**[[Darkpatterns.org]{.ul}](https://darkpatterns.org/) is a terrific
website conceived by Harry Brignull as part of a campaign to raise
awareness of dark patterns. The site includes a roundup of the most
common categories of dark patterns, as well as a hall of shame with
examples submitted by the UX community.**

I thought I would select some examples of dark patterns found in
ecommerce checkouts to highlight the issue. Most of the examples are
taken from the #darkpatterns hashtag on Twitter.

**Misdirection**

Where the website design nudges users towards a more expensive option
and distracts them from the standard option.

Misdirection is the sneakiest type of dark pattern because it exists in
a grey area. This sort of tactic is commonplace because it is harder to
outlaw, as opposed to the 'sneak into basket' tactic (discussed further
down the article), which is outlawed in the EU.

The example from Delta, shown below, uses a red button to nudge
checking-in users towards an upgrade. A must less conspicuous grey
button must be selected to say 'no thanks' and continue checking in

![🐈](media/image1.png){width="0.45555555555555555in"
height="0.45555555555555555in"}

[[**Ed Campodonico, **\@uxed]{.ul}](https://twitter.com/uxed)

![View image on Twitter](media/image2.jpeg){width="3.8541666666666665in"
height="3.4603991688538933in"}

Econsultancy blogger Paul Randall has previously highlighted [[an even
sneakier example of
misdirection]{.ul}](https://econsultancy.com/blog/68887-ethical-cro-the-end-of-dark-patterns/) from
ZSL London Zoo.

In the screenshot below you can see how the 'add to basket with
donation' green button appears to suggest moving forward to the next
stage of the checkout. The colourless 'without donation' button points
backward, leaving the unobservant user to assume this is some sort of
back arrow to return to a previous page.

![misdirection zsl](media/image3.jpeg){width="6.311722440944882in"
height="3.8618055555555557in"}

Misdirection is probably most commonly found on email unsubscribe
interfaces. When a user has clicked to unsubscribe, it is obviously
devious to highlight the '*keep my subscription*' option over the actual
intention of the user (to unsubscribe).

[[**Aaron
Benjamin**\@aBenjamin765]{.ul}](https://twitter.com/aBenjamin765)

![View image on Twitter](media/image4.jpeg){width="4.385498687664042in"
height="2.8472222222222223in"}

**Checkbox treachery**

Obfuscatory checkboxes are probably the most famous and most common
examples of dark patterns. What we're mainly talking about is opt-in or
opt-out checkboxes and accompanying spiel that businesses use to give
customers notional control over how their contact data is used. Whilst
in the US the CAN-SPAM Act does not restrict how businesses can collect
new subscribers (i.e. they do not need to gain prior consent), in the EU
consumers must be offered an opt-out option. In practice though, these
mandatory opt-out options can be a little confusing, or even downright
sly. Below is a heinous mobile example provided by [[Ben Tollady and
Gareth Roberts at UX New
Zealand]{.ul}](http://www.uxnewzealand.com/speakers/ben-and-gareth/).

![dark patterns](media/image5.jpeg){width="4.090277777777778in"
height="3.274403980752406in"}

Of course, another common dark pattern amongst checkboxes is double
negatives -- language that makes the user unsure whether to tick or to
untick. Here's a great example...

[[**Omicron**\@Omicron_o]{.ul}](https://twitter.com/Omicron_o)

![View image on Twitter](media/image6.jpeg){width="4.7in"
height="0.8541666666666666in"}

Or in the example below, a seeming call-to-action next to the checkbox
('keeping in touch') which is at odds with the functionality of the
checkbox ('keeping in touch' is merely a heading). Not cool...

[[**Joelle
Bataille**\@Joelle_Bataille]{.ul}](https://twitter.com/Joelle_Bataille)

![View image on Twitter](media/image7.jpeg){width="6.107425634295713in"
height="1.9640879265091864in"}

Lastly, here's a more subtle example of a dark pattern -- what appears
to be a radio is in fact a checkbox. One might argue this is a genuine
mistake -- it's certainly one to look out for on your own website.

[[**Benji Weber**\@benjiweber]{.ul}](https://twitter.com/benjiweber)

The [\@PostOffice](https://twitter.com/PostOffice) styles up opt-out
checkboxes to look like radiobuttons implying they\'re mutually
exclusive
[#DarkPatterns](https://twitter.com/hashtag/DarkPatterns?src=hash)

![View image on Twitter](media/image8.jpeg){width="2.5618055555555554in"
height="1.4618055555555556in"}

It's pretty simple, if you've decided to give the user the option (as is
necessary in Europe), you should provide an opt in (not an opt out) with
clear supporting text.

**Sneak into basket**

This is another classic. It is usually performed by offering a
supplementary service or product to a user, who is made to actively
unselect this extra product otherwise it will appear in the checkout.

The worst transgressors here are in the travel sector. Ryanair still
forces customers to deselect an insurance product when adding a flight
to basket, despite the fact that this tactic is illegal according to the
EU's consumer rights laws.

![ryanair dark pattern](media/image9.png){width="4.381944444444445in"
height="2.874597550306212in"}

*Image via [[Digital Tonic's Ryanair website
review]{.ul}](http://www.digital-tonic.co.uk/digital-tonic-blog/ryanairs-new-website-still-hiding-mean-tricks-dark-patterns/).*

Sports Direct is another high profile abuser of this dark pattern. In
the past a 'free' mug and Sports Direct magazine (£1 delivery charge)
have been added to customer baskets online, without any notification.

Though the retailer has now added a pop-up offering the 'free' mug to
users, note how inconspicuous the 'no thanks' text is compared to the
large white 'yes please' button.

Wow [\@sportsdirect](https://twitter.com/sportsdirect), a free gift!\
\
But what\'s this extra £1 delivery charge, ON TOP of the £4.99 standard
delivery charge?

![View image on Twitter](media/image10.jpeg){width="4.055555555555555in"
height="3.189469597550306in"}

**Obscured pricing**

Yet another travel example here. British Airways does not tell bookers
what price they will have to pay to add a bag to the hold after they
have booked their ticket, merely stating 'for a fee'. Nor does it tell
the price of seat selection or booking amendments. The obvious intention
here is not to undermine the price of the £31 upgrade from 'basic' to
'plus'.

[[**James Russell**\@kazaroth]{.ul}](https://twitter.com/kazaroth)

![View image on Twitter](media/image11.jpeg){width="4.131944444444445in"
height="3.852350174978128in"}

It's not just obscured pricing that can be a problem.
Darkpatterns.org [[highlights how Sainsbury's website does not allow
comparison of all of its
groceries]{.ul}](https://darkpatterns.org/types-of-dark-pattern/price-comparison-prevention),
instead displaying some prices per weight and some per unit. This makes
it hard for users to understand which product is cheapest.

**Misinformation / terrible language**

I can't work out if this example is intentional or not. I hope not. But
again it highlights the need to look at all your functional ecommerce
copy and determine if it is as clear as it could be.

[[**Game Over**\@twoplayer]{.ul}](https://twitter.com/twoplayer)

![View image on
Twitter](media/image12.jpeg){width="3.2803412073490814in"
height="1.6388888888888888in"}

**Hidden costs**

In the EU, all extra charges such as shipping must be highlighted (at
least the fact that they exist and will be applied) before the customer
gets to the checkout.

A good example of hidden costs provided by darkpatterns.org is [[on the
US flower delivery website
ProFlowers]{.ul}](https://darkpatterns.org/types-of-dark-pattern/hidden-costs).

**The ethics of CRO**

So, that's the end of my roundup of examples. Please do check out [[Paul
Randall's post on the ethics of conversion rate
optimisation]{.ul}](https://econsultancy.com/blog/68887-ethical-cro-the-end-of-dark-patterns) --
there is a way to optimise without misleading the customer.

And do share any dark patterns you see on your travels by using the
#darkpatterns hashtag.

*For more advice on UI design, subscribers can download the [[User
Experience and Interaction Design for Mobile & Web Best Practice
Guide]{.ul}](https://econsultancy.com/reports/user-experience-and-interaction-design-for-mobile-and-web/).*

**By [[Ben Davis]{.ul}](https://econsultancy.com/ben-davis/)  April 6th
2017**

**\
**

Questions for Digital Nudging Assignment (20 points possible)

What are dark patterns? Use your own words in your definition. (2)

Provide 3 categories of dark patterns (misdirection is one) along with
an example of each of the categories that you list. For each example,
please provide the unethical scenario from the article along with a
description of how the designer of the scenario is trying to deceive the
user. (6)

Category 1:

Example:

Category 2:

Example:

Category 3:

Example:

Dark patterns appear to be unethical. But how might someone support this
claim? We will look at the ethicality of dark patterns using three
ethical frameworks. If you have not explored these three frameworks
previously, summaries are included.

**Virtue ethics** (as opposed to deontology and utilitarianism) is an
ethical decision-making framework derived from the moral values that a
society has in common. Examples of moral values (also called virtues)
might include compassion, courage, generosity, gratitude, honesty,
humility, inclusion, integrity, justice, mercy, open-mindedness,
perseverance, respect, and transparency, but there are many others. An
activity might be considered unethical it if conflicts with one or more
of a society's virtues. Choose one scenario that you listed above, and
explain how it would conflict with a virtue. You may use a virtue
already listed, or choose another one that is important to you. (2
points)

**Deontological** ethics determines whether something is right or wrong
based on adherence to certain moral principles such as traffic laws, a
company's code of ethics, or The Ten Commandments. In a government
context, this set of principles might be the US Constitution or the UN
Charter of Human Rights. The primary computing organization (the ACM)
has its own code of ethics as do many business, scientific, and medical
organizations. A well-known principal from the American Medical
Association is "Do no harm". Another deontological principle could be
"Give credit where it is due."

Write a principle that you believe would be broken if an e-commerce site
was designed using one of the dark patterns you listed above? (2)

Using the ethical framework of **utilitarianism**, the ethics of a
situation is decided by whether a particular course of action will
benefit the most people. For example, vaccinations are considered to be
the ethical choice by most in our society because they protect the
general population (the majority stakeholder) from spread of disease.
Make a statement about the ethics of dark patterns from a utilitarian
point of view. Who benefits from the dark patterns? Who suffers? Should
they be used (are they ethical)? (2)

Go to an E-Commerce site that you use and look for an example of the use
of a dark pattern. Send a screenshot of this example to your professor
along with an explanation of why you believe this page is misleading
enough to be unethical. (6 points)

E-Commerce: Digital Nudging In-Class Handout

Consider these questions in your small group, and be prepared to share
them with the entire class. Use what you learned in your homework
assignment.

-   From the point of view of a business, what is the purpose of digital
    nudging -- what are they trying to achieve? Give examples.

-   Is this purpose (or purposes) inherently unethical? Why or why not?

-   What makes the digital nudging examples shown unethical? Use one of
    the ethical frameworks from the assignment (virtue ethics,
    deontology, utilitarianism) to support your conclusion.

-   Suggest ways that a company might increase their revenue through
    E-Commerce in a manner that removes these unethical aspects.
