---
title: "Professional ethics"
author: "TODO"
date: "2021-06-29"
output:
  blogdown::html_page:
    toc: true
    fig_width: 6
    dev: "svg"
---

Professional ethics

Module Summary

**Ethics background** required: Ideally, students should be familiar
with the four ethical frameworks presented in the first year curriculum
(virtue ethics, deontology, utilitarianism, analogies). If they (or the
professor) are not, brief summaries are provided in the activity
section.

**Subject matter** referred to in this module: Professional Ethics

**Placement** in overall ethics curriculum:

            Academic year: Year 2-4 core course that talks about
professional ethics.

> Recommended previous modules: First year ethics curriculum

            Recommended follow-up modules: No direct follow-up modules

**Time** required:

            In class: 30 minutes * *

**Learning objectives**:

-   Students review or are introduced to professional ethics issues that
    could arise in their future workplace

-   Students recognize that it is often hard to respond correctly in the
    moment

-   Students practice responding correctly to ethical issues

**Module overview**:

[Ethical issues to be considered]{.ul}: Professional ethics. May touch
on issues such as correct use of resources, sexual harassment,
discrimination, misreporting time worked, inadequate testing etc.

 

[Exercise flow:]{.ul}

-   Students are given familiar (non-professional) scenarios to consider
    both what a correct response would be, and why they may be tempted
    to respond "less than correctly."

-   An excerpt is read from the NY Times describing that what people
    know what they "should" do, in the moment we don't "want" to look
    silly or lose friends or risk our jobs.

-   Students review or are introduced to ethical issues that may arise
    in a professional environment

-   Students prepare themselves to deal with these issues, so that "in
    the moment" they will be more confident in their response and true
    to their character.

**Preparation**

Read through the entire module. Think about examples from your own
experience.

Possibly create a display (PowerPoint slide or other) of the 4 ethical
frameworks. You will find this text in the activity section.

**If this module is to be presented online**

See online addendum. Students go through assignment and then peer-review
the assignment of another student.

Instructors Guide

**Lesson plan**

[Introduction]{.ul} (10 minutes)

The goal of this introductory exercise is to get students thinking about
how hard it is to react correctly in the moment, and reasons why we may
act in a way that is opposed to our character.

-   Ask students: If you put a dent in someone's parked car with your
    > own car, what should you do?

    -   Hopefully students will say that they should leave their contact
        > information

-   Discuss with students: What are some reasons that the person causing
    > the dent would not leave a note?

> Some answers might be:

-   Fear of authority

-   No money

-   Fear of anger of the person whose car was dented

-   Didn't know you were supposed to leave a note

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Ask students: If you hear someone make a racist joke, what should
    > you do?

    -   Suggest to the perpetrator that the joke is inappropriate

-   Discuss with students: What are some reasons you would not do that?

> Possible answers:

-   Lose friend group

-   People think that you are being "holier than thou"

-   You just can't think quickly enough what to say

Read: From the NY Times:

*"When people predict how they're going to act in a given situation, the
'should' self dominates --- we should be fair, we should be generous, we
should assert our values," said Ann E. Tenbrunsel, a professor of
business ethics at the University of Notre Dame who is involved in the
EthicalSystems website. "But when the time for action comes, the 'want'
self dominates" --- I don't want to look like a fool, I don't want to be
punished.*

*"Our survival instinct is to want to be liked and to be included," said
Brooke Deterline, chief executive of Courageous Leadership, a consulting
firm that offers workshops and programs on dealing with ethical
situations. "We don't willfully do bad things, but when we're under
threat our initial instinct is to downplay or ignore problematic
situations."*

*Most people know the feeling: Something happens that we know is wrong
and we mean to speak up or make it right. But we can't quite figure out
how to do it, and the moment passes. And then we justify that it was
O.K. that we acted the way we did.*

*So how do we change this?*

*Like pilots who use flight simulators, people need to work on
situations that cause them anxiety before they occur. \[1\]*

[Activity (15 min)]{.ul}

Read or summarize to students: "The situations that **we** want to
explore which might give us anxiety are with regard to professional
ethics in our future workplaces."

Ask students to make a list of some unethical practices that could occur
at work. (Post these where students can see them as the list is being
made). Pull from your personal experience or from the list below to get
students going.

Some unethical practices could be

-   Recording hours that were not worked

-   Sexual harassment

-   Discrimination based on gender, sexual orientation, religion, or
    race

-   Inadequate testing due to time constraints (especially where safety
    is an issue)

-   Co-workers coming in on Monday hung over from a weekend of partying.

-   Taking a longer lunch break to watch their child\'s school play
    without asking or telling anyone.

-   Padding expense reports on trips or including expense items that
    were \"nice-to-have\" purchases.

-   Using significant company resources for personal use.

Spend some time talking about why these things could happen. For
example, someone might record hours that were not worked because they do
not want to lose their job, but have finished the work and really need
to pick up a child from school.

Talk about how you might respond to these issues as a co-worker.
Consider using one of the ethical frameworks in your response if it is
appropriate. Recall the frameworks:

-   **Virtue ethics:** Does the behavior go against a virtue that you
    know that person holds? Examples of virtues are honesty, integrity,
    compassion, gratitude, perseverance etc.

    -   **Example:** I know that you are someone who values quality work
        > and doing your best. I've noticed that you have been pretty
        > tired lately and not feeling physically well, especially on
        > Mondays. Is there something that you could do differently on
        > the weekends?

-   **Deontology:** Is the behavior against a rule that is held by the
    company and could therefore result in job loss?

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   **Analogies:** Finding a similar situation where you believe that
    the perpetrator would more clearly see the unethicality of the
    situation

    -   **Example:** You know that joke that you have been telling where
        > the IT person is the butt of the joke? What if an ethnic
        > minority was the butt of the joke? Do you think it would be OK
        > to tell?

-   **Utilitarianism:** Arguing the ethicality of a situation based on
    what is best for the majority

    -   **Example:** I've noticed that you have been pretty tired lately
        > and not feeling physically well, especially on Mondays. For
        > the first few hours of the day, several of your coworkers have
        > had to cover for you because you've been away from your desk.
        > Is there something that you could do differently on the
        > weekends?

[Reflection (5 min)]{.ul}

Ask students to think about times when they have acted out of character
or not reacted at all when they know that they should have. What were
the triggers? Can they relate to any of the reasons for acting out of
character? Provide an opportunity for students to speak up, but don't
force it.

An example from the world of professors might be to decide to give
easier exams that don't adequately test a student's knowledge because
you don't want to get poor student evaluations.

An example for a student might be to share an answer with a friend
because you don't want to lose a friendship.

Encourage them to practice being aware of these triggers in everyday
interactions.

Reference

\[1\] "In Life and Business, Learning to Be Ethical", *New York Times,
retrieved May 29, 2020*

https://www.nytimes.com/2014/01/11/your-money/in-life-and-business-learning-to-be-ethical.html

[Assessment]{.ul} (to be included at a later date on a quiz, paper, or
exam to determine if LOs were reached)

-   Provide three examples of unethical practices that could occur at
    work

*Possible answers: using substantial company resources for person
purposes, padding expense reports, discrimination, sexual harassment,
working less hours than reported*

-   Name two reason why someone would act differently in response to
    these unethical practices than they know they "should" act

*Possible answers: fear for their job, don't want others to see them as
a "snitch", wouldn't know what to say*

-   Imagine that you are on a business trip with a colleague. Your
    company allows employees to get "deluxe" rooms, and pays for meals,
    but not for alcohol. You know that your colleague chose a cheaper
    room that comes with a special "wine and dine" package. In the end,
    it costs the company the same amount of money.

    -   Would you say that your colleague is acting unethically? Support
        your conclusion based on one of the frameworks discussed in
        class

> Possible Answers:

-   *Unethical because it breaks company rules -- they are actually
    paying for the alcohol (uses deontology)*

-   *Unethical because conflicts with the virtue of honesty -- lying by
    omission*

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Assume that you believe this is unethical behavior. How would you
    deal with it?

> Possible Answers:

-   *Remind your colleague that this is really against company policy
    and if they really can't afford the wine, you'd be happy to buy them
    a bottle*

-   *Suggest that they contact the employer and ask if they can make
    this trade*
