---
title: "Media Literacy"
author: "TODO"
date: "2021-06-29"
output:
  blogdown::html_page:
    toc: true
    fig_width: 6
    dev: "svg"
---

Media Literacy Module

Module Summary

 

**Ethics background** required: Basic understanding of the analogy
ethical framework is helpful, but it will be briefly reviewed in the
module.

**Subject matter** referred to in this module:

This module can be used as a precursor to any assignment where students
are required to perform research on the web and are expected to choose
their own articles. References are made to technology, but no specific
knowledge is needed.

**Placement** in overall ethics curriculum:

> Academic year: Years 2-4 where students are preparing to go deeper
> into subjects in their disciplines

            Recommended previous modules: Year one curriculum covering
ethical frameworks is helpful.

> Recommended follow-up modules: We use this as a precursor to the open
> source accessibility module

**Time** required:

            Out of class for students: 30 minutes

Professor analysis of student responses: 15 min + (depends on size of
class)

In class: 20-30 minutes * *

**Learning objectives**:

-   Learn about media literacy and apply it to finding articles for
    research

-   Practice critical thinking, and articulating observations

-   Review and apply the analogy ethical framework

* *

**Module overview**:

[Ethical issues to be considered]{.ul}: Media Literacy, Transparency,
Data Integrity, Diversity

Many students get all of their information from social media. It is
often one-sided and not fact-checked. Through the analogy of the best
set of witnesses for a trial, students are helped to understand that it
is important to read multiple, reliable sources with differing views
when doing background research.

 

**Preparation required:**

-   **Read entire module**

-   Make pre-discussion material available either online or on paper.

-   Review the answers that students have made about which of the
    articles is most helpful

-   Prepare a slide (or paper handouts) with the analogous scenario for
    the in-class activity

[Exercise flow:]{.ul}

This part should be completed prior to class

-   Students read an included article (a review) that touts the good
    points of a product

-   Students answer questions about whether the product would be good to
    purchase, and what, if any drawbacks they see

-   Students read a second included article which gives both sides of
    the product, and is written by a credible organization

-   Students answer questions about the credibility and helpfulness of
    each of the articles

> In class part

-   An analogy is considered to help shed light on students' varied
    opinions

-   As a class, students come up with guidelines as to what is a
    credible article and what is not

-   Professor augments those guidelines as necessary

Instructors Guide

**Lesson plan**

[Pre-discussion assignment: Homework or activity completed in previous
class (professor's choice)]{.ul}

-   Professor has students complete the handout as homework or in some
    other way before the class discussion so that the professor can read
    student answers.

***Notes to professor on the pre-discussion assignment**: The first
article is a review for a lithium battery power backup system. The
author works for GearJunkie which appears to be a site that provides
reviews on tech items. The product was probably donated to the author
for free and so the author may have a motivation to review it favorably.
Also, since the site is most concerned with tech items it would probably
favor the techie battery over the old-fashioned gas-powered generator.
The author does not address the drawbacks of price, recharging the
battery when there is no sun, the lack of portability of the battery
etc. Reading the first article alone probably does not give a clear
enough picture for the decision to be made.*

*The second article is written by an author representing Consumer
Reports, a reputable review company. The article gives pros and cons of
both of the options. Some students felt that because the article gave
both sides, it would have been enough to read. Both articles were
current at the time of this writing.*

[Introduction to class discussion portion (To be read or summarized and
**tailored to your results**) (1 min)]{.ul}

You have had the opportunity to read two articles presenting on similar
topics, but with different purposes and levels of credibility. While
there were very interesting observations from everyone, It might
surprise you that there were different ideas on which of the
articles/authors were more credible, the reasons for their credibility,
and whether it was helpful to read just the more credible article or
both.

One of the tools for helping to clarify a situation is an analogy.
Recall that an analogy allows for the comparison two completely
different things that might have similarities in concepts. Generally,
the concept in the analogy is better understood, and might help in
comprehending the concept in the other. I would like to present an
analogy to see if it adds clarity to why and how we must carefully
select articles for background material

**Note to professor**: It is probably a good idea to make the analogous
scenario available either on-line, on paper, or using presentation
software. We also had the suggestion from a student that we should give
a heads-up that the analogy used might be a sensitive topic for some.
Giving that quick warning might prepare students who have found
themselves in a hospital frequently either as a patient or a visitor.

[Activity 1 (10 min)]{.ul}

Consider the following courtroom witness scenarios for a case where a
jury is attempting to reach a verdict in a wrongful death case. The
individual died while in a hospital from a complication of an injury.
The injury itself was not life-threatening. You will be asked to give
your opinion on which is the best set of **courtroom** witnesses and
why.

Set 1: The witnesses are many: the patient's hospital roommate, the
patient's rabbi, the patient's cousin, the hospital's HR director, the
hospital's nighttime security guard, the hospital's PR director.

Set 2: There are three witnesses: the attending physician, the patient's
sister (a nurse) who was a frequent visitor and kept detailed notes, and
an outside expert agreed upon by both the hospital's lawyer and the
patient's family lawyer.

Set 3: There are two witnesses: the attending physician and an expert on
the patient's injury hired by the family's law team

Set 4: There are four witnesses: the attending physician, the patient's
sister (nurse, frequent visitor, note-taker), the hospital's PR
director, the patient's rabbi.

Set 5: There is one witness, an outside expert agreed upon by both the
hospital's lawyer and the patient's family lawyer.

Set 6: The patient's sister (nurse, frequent visitor, note taker)

Rank the sets 1-6, using #1 for your top choice of witnesses. Be
prepared to explain your choice.

**When students have completed their rankings:**

-   Ask a student which set of witnesses was their top choice. Ask them
    to explain why. Get a top choice from one or more additional
    students.

-   Also ask for the sets of witnesses that students ranked as the worst
    choice and why.

**Notes to the professor**

We expect that students will disagree, and that is OK. The goal is to
get them to think, to articulate and to support their choices, and
perhaps to hear another opinion.

Sets 2 and 4 are likely top choices. There are multiple witnesses and
they represent both sides in each case. Also, these may be appealing
because there are records (Physician records and sister's notes)
involved. Set 2 might be preferable since one witness appears to be more
impartial.

Set 3 also has witnesses from both sides, but no second voice on either
side. Students may like this choice because each seems to be an expert.

Set 1 also has multiple witnesses (the most) representing both sides,
but none are experts (credibility may be in question)

Set 5 may be desirable to some, keeping things simple, but there are no
checks and balances. Still some may see no need as this witness should
be impartial

Set 6 may be desirable to some, given that the sister was there a lot
and had lots of data.

**After discussing the analogy, ask students how choosing articles is
similar to choosing witnesses, and how it might be different.**

**Notes to the professor:**

-   We had students who thought that only reading the second article
    > (which tried to give both sides) was acceptable, corresponding to
    > set 5. Talk about how any one person can be biased and not have
    > all of the information. Multiple sources are always valuable

-   We had students who liked the first article because it appeared to
    > present the most statistics possibly corresponding to our
    > sister-notetaker in set 6. Talk about how stats can be skewed.

-   Set 2 is probably the closest to our set of articles although it
    > does have voices on each side along with the one that should give
    > both sides.

-   Students may also see set 3 as corresponding to our generator
    > article example because there are 2 witnesses and 2 articles.
    > Point out that this is different because there is no one person
    > looking at both sides. It might still be better than having just
    > one witness or

[Activity 2 (5 mins)]{.ul}

-   As a class, students and professor define a set of guidelines for
    credible articles/authors based on the analogy and the reading.

***Notes to the professor**: Experts on media literacy ask researchers
to consider the following when choosing articles for their background
research:*

1.  *Consider the credibility of the author*

    a.  *Was this article peer-reviewed? OR*

    b.  *Does the author have credentials that suggest credibility
        (represents a credible company, has degrees or significant
        experience in the area being written about). Sometimes the
        company behind the author must be researched as well.*

2.  *What is the purpose and intended audience of the article or post*

    a.  *Is the author trying to convince the reader of one position?*

    b.  *Is the author writing to what he believes is a group of
        like-minded people? (such as often happens on social media)*

    c.  *It is suspicious if an idea or product is presented with
        absolutely no down-side*

3.  *Is the article current?*

    a.  *Could new ideas/products have appeared since it was written?*

    b.  *Could theories have been disproven more recently?*

4.  *Does the article/post itself reference credible authors using the
    same criteria?*

5.  *It is helpful to search for articles on the same subject that
    present differing views.*

[Reflection (4 min)]{.ul}:

-   Ask the students if using the analogy was a helpful way to think
    about article selection and to explain their answer (why or why not
    helpful)

[Assessment: (to be used on quiz or exam)]{.ul}

-   Ask students if they can provide two things to look for when
    assessing the credibility of a post or an article.

-   Provide students with an article (along with available information
    such as URL) and have them assess the credibility of that article.

-   Ask students what analogy was used to help clarify the attributes of
    articles that should be used in selecting background material. Ask
    them to analyze the effectiveness of the analogy: what insights did
    it provide, in what way was it lacking?

Pre-Discussion Assignment for Media Literacy Module

As a resident of a backcountry area of Southern California, the author
of this module has experienced planned power outages lasting multiple
days. These outages are implemented by the power companies to reduce the
chance of wildfires caused by downed power lines during strong wind
events. In an effort to be more prepared in the future, the author
started researching backup power systems. The two most common systems
are gas-powered generators and large lithium batteries. The article
below is one read during the process of determining which to buy. Read
the article and answer the questions that follow.

Found at:
<https://gearjunkie.com/ecoflow-delta-electric-generator-review>

**Review: The Fast-Charging Power Station That Blew Up Kickstarter**

September 20, 2019 \| By Berne Broudy

EcoFlow's Delta 1300 battery powers your work and play tools
emissions-free. And it claims to recharge faster than any other
battery-based generator. No wonder it's nearing \$2 million on
Kickstarter.

Brands like Goal Zero and Enerplex brought the lithium-ion battery pack
into the mainstream during the past decade. But while its large battery
systems have begun to compete with gas-powered generators, most
consumers continue to use internal combustion for large-scale home use.

Recharging is one of the major hurdles of large batteries capable of
powering tools and appliances. Most of the systems require a full day or
more to recharge. Enter the EcoFlow Delta 1300 battery generator.

Live now on Kickstarter, it handles daily tasks and emergency power
needs with one breadbox-size unit. It packs enough power to run shop
vacs, table saws, microwaves, and computers. It can even give an
electric car an extra 6-7 miles of power.

And it can recharge from stone dead to 80 percent in just one hour.

Small and portable enough to take into the woods or in an (electric)
adventure rig, this battery can give you juice anywhere you can haul it.

**Eco-Flow Delta Review**

The 30-pound Delta 1300 has six AC outlets, two USB-C PD ports, and four
USB outlets. A large LCD screen tells you how much battery the 100-cell
lithium-ion bank has left by percentage and hours.

Push a button, turn it on, plug in a dead cellphone, and a fully charged
Delta will tell you it has 99 hours of power remaining.

Plug in a 13-inch MacBook Air, and the readout bounces between 57 and 85
hours of power remaining. Because devices draw power inconsistently,
numbers will fluctuate. So Delta tells you in real time how much juice
it has left.

Unlike gas generators, which require annual maintenance, EcoFlow claims
the Delta requires nothing and will hold its charge for a year. And
while gas generators emit carbon monoxide and can be dangerous to use in
a closed space, the Delta's only emissions are a quiet hum and a little
bit of heat. So you can plunk the Delta onto your kitchen counter to run
a microwave or coffee machine without worry.

Delta takes 2 hours to recharge plugged into a wall and has
solar-charging capability. EcoFlow estimates the lifecycle to 800
charges. By contrast, Goal Zero's Yeti 1400 takes 25 hours to charge.
It's also twice the weight, twice the price, and claims a lifecycle of
500 charges.

In my test at home, we ran every tool we had and charged every device:
circular saws, table saws, shop vacs, computers, phones, even our
refrigerator.

We were able to fully drain the battery during normal use only when we
plugged in a full freezer trying to cool its contents from 14 degrees
Fahrenheit down to zero. The battery lasted at least 20 hours --- we
woke up the next morning to it needing a recharge.

**EcoFlow Electric Generator: How It Works**

Delta's surprising power comes from a proprietary battery management
system that, according to EcoFlow CEO Eli Harris, maximizes the power
storage efficiency. It collects each cell's temperature and power status
and tweaks the charging current and voltage for the safest, fastest
charging.

EcoFlow also developed a charging platform that allows alternating
current (AC) from a wall outlet to direct input into Delta's inverter,
increasing its charging power at the same time. "By passing through the
inverter directly, we can increase charging speed to more than 10 times
the traditional AC-to-DC adapter cable," Harris said.

Recharge the Delta from a wall socket, carport, or solar panel. It plugs
into the wall with the same cord you'd use to plug in a computer --- no
specialized, device-specific power brick required. So you don't have to
worry about misplacing your charger.

And there's no fiddling with the unit when you want to recharge from a
solar panel. All direct current (DC) power supplies below DC 60V --- via
an adapter, solar panel, or DC car output --- go into a single input
port.

**EcoFlow Delta Battery**

Delta manages rugged construction without a heavy, bulky, full-steel
casing. Its Tesla-inspired housing uses high-grade aluminum and steel
for strength and structural rigidity.

Impact-absorbing plastic, protective rigid metal plates, and four
aluminum pillar reinforcements complete the packaging and ready Delta to
withstand the hazards of a job site, garage project, or overland
adventure.

Delta raised \$1.5 million in its first week on Kickstarter, and it's
well on its way to surpassing \$2 million. We are impressed with its
power, versatility, quick charge time, and compact size. If you support
Delta before the campaign closes on October 19, you'll receive a
lifetime battery warranty.

EcoFlow Delta 1300 Electric Generator

Weight: 30 lbs.

Ports: 6 AC, 2 USB-C PD, 4 USB

Shelf life: 12 months

AC output: 1,600 W (surge 3,100 W)

Charge time: 1.7 hours

Battery type: Lithium-ion

Price: \$1,400 (\$899 early bird buy-in)

Questions on the EcoFlow article:

1.  Is this product the best solution to the problem of needing power
    backup during the annual fire season in California? \_\_\_\_\_\_

2.  Whether you believe it is or not, list at least 3 reasons why it
    could be.

3.  Do you see any drawbacks to this product?

Now read the second article included and answer the questions that
follow it

Retrieved from:
<https://www.consumerreports.org/portable-power-stations/portable-power-stations-things-to-know-battery-inverter-generators/>
1/17/2020

5 Things to Know About Portable Power Stations

These pricey battery-powered devices are the only type of generator that
can be used indoors safely

By Haniya Rae

April 12, 2019

Since generators emit carbon monoxide, they require that you
take [[critical safety
measures]{.ul}](https://www.consumerreports.org/generators/generator-safety-tips-to-get-you-through-a-storm/),
including running the device outside, at least 20 feet away from any
structure.

But in an age when we can charge our smartphones with a battery pack
that fits inside a pants pocket, shouldn\'t there be a simpler way to
restore power in the wake of a storm? Or, say, power a campsite without
the constant hum of a gas-fueled generator?

Such is the promise of portable power stations, also known as
battery-powered inverter generators. Essentially, they\'re oversized
rechargeable batteries---about the size of a countertop microwave
oven---that you plug into a typical 110-volt outlet to top off. 

When duty calls, you can safely run a portable power station inside,
since it doesn\'t generate any emissions. They have enough capacity to
power a few small appliances for a short time. With a host of different
outlets (standard 120v outlets, USB ports, and DC chargers), you can use
the station to charge electronics, too. And the units often come with
portable solar panels, to add more charging capabilities and extend
runtime.

"These generators have no fumes and all of the models we tested made
virtually no noise," says test engineer Dave Trezza, who oversees
generator testing at Consumer Reports. "But, if these power stations go
dead and you're unable to use your solar panels, you can't recharge
them. You can't just use another gallon of gas."

We see models from brands, including Goal Zero, Humless, K2, and Kohler
in our [[portable power station
ratings]{.ul}](https://www.consumerreports.org/products/portable-power-stations/ratings-overview/).
Some companies, like Goal Zero, market these portable power stations as
perfect for apartment preparedness during storms (as opposed to
single-family homes with a yard that can accommodate a generator).

**How We Test Portable Power Stations**\
In our labs, CR test engineers evaluate five key measures to rate
portable power stations: runtime, power delivery, power quality, ease of
use, and noise.

To test runtime, we run a constant 300-watt load to simulate powering a
TV and a few lights. We also hook each battery up to a side-by-side
refrigerator to see how long it lasts. The best model in our tests
powered the fridge for 44 hours on one charge (the worst only managed
for 13 hours). For power delivery, or how well a model can maintain
voltage when tasked with different loads, we use a variety of devices,
including a 1⁄2-horsepower submersible pump and a 10,000-BTU air
conditioners.

We also judge noise output and found that, as a category, these
batteries run quietly: All the models we tested earned an Excellent
score for noise.

Below, our experts share some pros and cons on using portable power
stations. See how the most popular models fared in our ratings, and
check our [[generator buying
guide]{.ul}](https://www.consumerreports.org/cro/generators/buying-guide/index.htm) to
compare portable power stations to other types of generators.

1\. They Can't Deliver Nearly as Much Power as Gas Generators

As with their gasoline-fueled counterparts, portable power stations
require a [transfer switch]{.ul} should you wish to power things such as
your furnace, overhead lights, or any thing else in your home that's
hardwired.

But while a recreational inverter generator would probably keep the TV
and a few lights on for 8 to 13 hours on one tank of gas, you\'d see
anywhere from 3 to 9 hours of power, under the same circumstances, with
a portable power station. 

And you won\'t be able to run, for instance, your power-guzzling well
pump.

2\. They Take Awhile to Charge

In our tests, most of these models require hours of charging (typically
overnight) to provide you with a full battery and max runtime.

So---assuming you fully charged the battery before a predicted weather
event---a portable power station could give you hours of electricity to
run a refrigerator or another essential appliance.

But Trezza notes that once the battery is dead, if you're without power
and minimal sun, there's no way to recharge.

3\. Charging With Solar Panels Can Be Iffy and Lengthy

If you\'re dealing with an outage or you\'re otherwise off the grid,
charging the power station via solar panels is your only option---and
that\'s provided you have good sun and no obstructions.

In our tests, we found that the solar panels can add to the runtime, but
that might only amount to an extra hour or two of power with  larger
appliances.

4\. They're Not All That Portable

Portable power stations are about the size of an average microwave oven,
but they\'re fairly heavy---most in our tests weigh more than 80 pounds.

That means you\'ll likely need an extra pair of hands to lift one into
the trunk of your car. Some of the models come with wheels, but not all
wheels are large in size, which makes rolling them across a lawn
difficult.

5\. They Don't Come Cheap

The portable power stations we tested cost between \$1,500 and \$3,500.
And our [[best portable gas
generator]{.ul}](https://www.consumerreports.org/products/portable-generators/generac-xt8000-395274/overview/) costs
less than the worst portable power station.

Before buying one of these power stations, consider if you might be
better served by a portable generator. In the event of a outage, you can
continue to add fuel, and portable generators typically provide enough
power to keep larger appliances running. Check out [[our buying guide on
generators]{.ul}](https://www.consumerreports.org/cro/generators/buying-guide/index.htm) to
learn which type might best suit your needs.

Answer the following questions:

1.  Do you believe that the product described in the first article is
    the best solution to the need of the author of this module for
    backup power?\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

2.  What are the positives to the battery backup solution in comparison
    to the gas-powered generator? Give at least three.

3.  What are the drawbacks to the battery backup solution in comparison
    to the gas-powered generator? Give at least three.

The last set of questions will ask you to consider both articles.

Consider the 2 articles:

1.  Did your answers about the benefits and drawbacks of the
    battery-powered product change after reading the second article? If
    so, how? If not, why did the additional information not influence
    you?

2.  Who were the authors of the two articles? What, if anything, do you
    know about each of them?

3.  From the articles and information provided about them, what can you
    tell about the credibility of each of these authors. What do you
    know, if anything, about how believable they might be?

4.  Can you learn anything about the credibility of each of the articles
    from their URLs? Try to go beyond the dot extension (.org, .com).

5.  What do you think is the purpose of each of the articles?

6.  Do you think that the articles are current enough to be helpful?

7.  Which article did you find most helpful? Would it have been enough
    to read just that one article?

8.  Answer this question just for yourself: When was the last time that
    you read something that came from a differing opinion or perspective
    from your current belief -- this could be political, socio-economic,
    religious, ethnic, gender, physical ability etc. just as a reality
    check for the validity of your view?
