---
title: "Open Source Accessibility"
author: "TODO"
date: "2021-06-29"
output:
  blogdown::html_page:
    toc: true
    fig_width: 6
    dev: "svg"
---

Open Source Accessibility Module

Module Summary

 

**Ethics background** required: It is helpful if students are familiar
with the utilitarian and virtue ethics methods of considering ethical
dilemmas. They should understand what stakeholders are.  For any who
need it, there are brief reviews of these concepts in the assignment. It
is suggested that the Media Literacy module be completed prior to this
module, but principles of finding credible articles is reviewed in the
student homework handout.

**Subject matter** referred to in this module: Linux or other open
source software

**Placement** in overall ethics curriculum:

            Academic year: Year 2-4 core course that uses open source
software (OS works if students use

Linux)

            Recommended previous modules: First year ethics curriculum
and media literacy module

            Recommended follow-up modules: No direct follow-up modules

**Time** required:

            In class: 20-30 minutes * *

*          * Out of class: 30 minutes

**Learning objectives**:

-   Students apply what they know about media literacy to finding
    articles on open source software

-   Understand the terms "open source" and "proprietary" and consider
    the benefits of each

-   Expand student's knowledge in the area of the ethical issue of
    accessibility

-   Evaluate the accessibility of open source software using the
    utilitarian and virtue ethics frameworks

-   Practice articulating and supporting a view about using open source
    software in light of accessibility issues

-   Students have the opportunity to find a creative, ethical solution
    to creating accessible software

**Module overview**:

[Ethical issues to be considered]{.ul}: Accessibility, Media Literacy

This module requires students to complete some homework outside of
class. They will be finding credible articles that consider the pros and
cons of open source software and posting summaries online prior to
class. During class they will be discussing with groups how open source
and proprietary software measure up in regard to accessibility
(economic, mental, and physical).

**Preparation**: Read the entire module. Post the homework assignment
online (or print on papers if you would like to have the assignment
completed off-line. Print the group discussion questions either one per
group or one per student.

 

[Exercise flow:]{.ul}

-   For homework, students find and read three articles from
    [credible]{.ul} sources describing the pros and cons of open source
    software vs. proprietary. Results of this research should be posted
    online or handed in prior to the classwork part of this module.
    Homework is found on the "student homework handout."

-   In class, professor introduces the idea of accessibility. Class
    brainstorms together on the different types of disabilities and what
    accommodations might be required in software products to address
    them.

-   Students work in groups considering questions on the accessibility
    handout

-   Students complete an exercise that shows that the virtue ethics
    framework doesn't clarify the accessible software dilemma, and that
    the utilitarian framework might be better.

 

Instructors Guide

**Lesson plan**

[Introduction]{.ul} (to be read or summarized to class) (5 min)

 

Ask students: "In your own words, what is open source software?"
*(definition is on handout)*

One of the strongest arguments for open source software is that it is
free, making it economically accessible to most people. In this
discussion, we will consider other aspects of accessibility with regard
to open source software. Accessibility is one of the current ethical
considerations that software engineers must take into account as they
design new software.

 

The Oxford Dictionary defines accessibility as:  "The quality of being
able to be reached or entered."

 

It further explains accessibility as

1.1 The quality of being easy to obtain or use.

'students were concerned about the accessibility of quality academic
counselling'

 

1.2 The quality of being easily understood or appreciated.

'the accessibility of his work helped to popularize modern art'

 

1.3 The quality of being easily reached, entered, or used by people who
have a disability.

'many architects believe that accommodating wheelchairs is all there is
to providing accessibility'

 

Have students brainstorm on the disabilities (learning, mental,
emotional, physical) that people have to deal with today. Then have them
come up with reasonable accommodations that software engineers might be
able to include to help with these issues. The chart below provides the
instructor with some ideas. There are many more.

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
  Disability          Software accommodation
  ------------------- ---------------------------------------------------
  Blindness           Audible output

  Color blindness     Particular color schemes (don't use red and green
                      or pink and gray together)

  Deafness            Closed caption or other written
                      instructions/descriptions

  Limited mobility    Special hardware

  Dyslexia            Choice of font (Arial and Courier are good)

  ADHD                Good spacing in text -- pages that are not too
                      "busy"

  Chronic pain        Interfaces that reduce the amount of movement
                      required

  Depression          Clear written instructions, allows for remote (work
                      from home) communication

  Anxiety             Simple interfaces and instructions

  Autism/Asperger's   Good spacing in text -- pages that are not too
                      "busy"
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

 

[Activity -- students evaluate open source and proprietary software with
regard to accessibility (10 min)]{.ul}

 

Divide students into groups of 3-5 and pass out the student group
discussion handouts. Students are asked to answer some questions based
on their reading homework.

**If students are struggling, here are some potential answers to the
questions:**

Is open source software easy to obtain and use?

-   * It is easy to obtain in that it is free.*

-   *Sometimes the software downloading instructions might not be as
    clear as they are for proprietary software that has a whole team
    writing the manuals*

-   *Are there more bugs in open source software? Debatable. With more
    eyes on it there are more people to find and correct bugs.
    Proprietary software might have rushed deadlines so testing is not
    as thorough as desired. On the other hand proprietary software
    should have a testing team along with a documents team and a
    helpdesk.*

-   * Is open source easy to use? Also debatable. Again, no helpdesk for
    free versions, but lots of open forums.*

-   *A user would have to consider if the software would run on the
    user's current operating system, or if a virtual machine would be
    required?*

-   *Open source is not locked into a particular vendor's platform so it
    is often usable by more people.*

-   *Your students should have other thoughts from their reading*

 

 

 Is open source software easily understood?

-   * Is the interface good?*

-   *Are there sufficient manuals? If the user wants to configure or
    change the code is the documentation (comments in code) good?*

-   *Since many people are touching the code, have they kept the
    documentation current? This is probably more likely to happen with
    proprietary software, but again, those open forums are invaluable!*

 

 Is open source software easy to access by people with disabilities? Be
sure to think about all of the different disabilities that you discussed
with your class.

-   *Disabilities can be physical (visual, auditory, motor), mental, or
    cognitive (learning disabilities).*

-   * Proprietary software designers may be more likely to include
    features like interfaces with attention to color-blindness, voice
    recognition, or audible readings of software.*

-   * Since open source software has more people looking at it, the
    diversity might allow for people who are sensitive to less common
    disabilities to make unique changes.*

-   *Open source was created to meet the needs of the original author,
    so might not, at least initially be very robust*

[Reflection as a class]{.ul}

Ask students what the problem is with an ethical analysis using virtue
ethics (both approaches -- proprietary and open source violate various
virtues). Ask students to suggest some of the virtues violated.

*Virtue ethics analysis (students may arrive at either answer using
virtue ethics -- the idea is to get them to think! ) Some of the virtues
that might be violated with proprietary are generosity and transparency.
With open source, quality and hospitality (bad documentation) could be
issues.*

*In trying to come up with a Utilitarian solution (helpful to the most
people) students may come up with hybrid solutions such as the
following:*

-   *Basic software is open source, but customers can pay for customized
    accessibility features*

-   *Large companies support programmers in open source projects as
    add-ons to proprietary projects*

-   *Software is free, but training and documentation cost*

-   *Open source project display advertisements*

 

 

[Assessment]{.ul} (to be included at a later date on a quiz, paper, or
exam to determine if LOs were reached)

Ask students if the discussion changed the way that they look at open
source or proprietary software

Ask students what they learned about designing software with an eye for
accessibility

Ask students to provide 2 accessibility issues with open source software

Ask students to provide 2 accessibility issues with proprietary software

Ask if virtue ethics or utilitarianism was a better framework for
considering this ethical dilemma and why

 

 

 

**Student handouts are attached**

 

Open Source vs Proprietary Software Homework Assignment

If a piece of software is considered to be "open source", it means that
anyone has access to the actual code and can change it for their
purposes. In general, the software is free to use, but a price may be
paid for support. Linux is one of the most common examples of open
source software. Proprietary software is software like Microsoft Windows
or your favorite computer game where you are only provided with the
executable binary and have no access to the code.

One of the main benefits of open source software is that it is free.
There are other benefits as well, along with drawbacks. Your job is to
find 3 credible articles on the advantages and disadvantages of open
source software vs. proprietary software. Pros and cons of both must be
represented across the three articles. If you have discussed media
literacy, you will recall that credible articles have the following
properties:

1.  The author is well known or his/her credentials are strong and easy
    to find. AND/OR

2.  The organization represented on the webpage is known and reputable

3.  The purpose of the article is mainly information, not to sell a
    product or push an opinion -- some credible articles may be mostly
    one-sided but acknowledge another side and are not intended to be
    the sole article used

4.  The timeliness of the article is appropriate to the discipline (a
    literature or history article that is dated may be fine, but a
    computer science or political science article that addresses current
    technology or the current state of the political climate should not
    be).

5.  The article/post itself references credible authors using same
    criteria presented above

Another important consideration

6.  The article or post is one of several diverse articles or posts that
    you use to gather information

List each article found below. Use at least three criteria from the list
above that are true about the article to support its credibility. List
the pros and cons that the article reveals about open source software.
This completed document should be uploaded prior to the next class
meeting and **should include at least 5 different pros and 5 different
cons across the articles (not each).**

Article 1 Title and link to article

Author of article or organization represented:

Credibility points:

-   
-   
-   

Pros and/or Cons of open source verses proprietary software

Article 2 Title and link to article

Author of article or organization represented:

Credibility points:

-   
-   
-   

Pros and/or Cons

 

 

Article 3 Title and link to article:

Author of article or organization represented:

Credibility points:

-   
-   
-   

Pros and/or Cons

Student Handout for Group Discussion

Recall that the definition of Accessibility from the Oxford Dictionary
is threefold:

1.1 The quality of being easy to obtain or use.

1.2 The quality of being easily understood or appreciated.

1.3 The quality of being easily reached, entered, or used by people who
have a disability.

** **

**Using what you learned in your reading about the benefits of open
source software and of proprietary software,** consider with your group
the pros and cons of open source software with regard to each of the
sub-definitions of accessibility. Be prepared to discuss your answers
with the class.

-    Is open source software easy to obtain and use?

> In what ways is it easy, and in what ways might it be hard?

 

 

 

 

 

 

-   Is open source software easily understood?

> What is required for software to be understandable?
>
> What do you know about open source software that might inform your
> answer to this?

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

-   Is open source software easy to access by people with disabilities?
    > Be sure to think about all of the different disabilities that you
    > discussed with your class.

-   Would any of these be more or less likely to be a problem with
    > open-source vs. proprietary software? Why?

 

 

 

 

You have explored the pros and cons of open source and proprietary
software. One of the ways to decide the best approach (proprietary or
open source) for creating software to support accessibility would be to
use the virtue ethics framework. Recall that this framework looks at
which virtues are upheld with a given decision, and which are violated.
Let us consider which of the virtues might be violated by the
proprietary approach and by the open source approach. Put a P by the
virtues (shown on the next page) violated by a purely proprietary
approach, and an O by virtues that might be violated by the purely open
source approach.

Adaptability

Attentiveness

Authenticity

Cleanliness

Commitment

Compassion

Contentment

Cooperation

Courage

Dignity

Excellence

Faithfulness

Generosity

Gratitude

Harmony

Honesty

Hospitality

Humility

Inclusion

Integrity

Initiative

Justice

Kindness

Loyalty

Mercy

Moderation

Open-mindedness

Optimism

Patience

Perseverance

Professionalism

Provide for others

Quality

Reliability

Respect

Self-discipline

Service

Sustainability

Tact

Transparency

You probably discovered that both approaches violate one or more
virtues. This is not straightforward!

Let's turn to another framework. The Utilitarian framework.
Utilitarianism suggests that the most ethical approach is the one that
is the best for the most people. Make a list below of the stakeholders
involved in producing/using software with an eye for all kinds of
accessibility (economic, physical, mental). Next to the stakeholder,
make a list of their needs. The list is started for you as an example,
but there are other stakeholders and needs.

+------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| Stakeholder      | Need or contribution                              |
+==================+===================================================+
| Software         | -   Provide for themselves and/or their families  |
| creators         |                                                   |
|                  | -   Understand the requirements of the            |
| (designers,      |     > application. What is its goal, who are its  |
| developers,      |     > users, and what can realistically be        |
| managers,        |     > implemented                                 |
| maintenance      |                                                   |
| etc.)            | -   Clear specifications for writing the code     |
|                  |                                                   |
|                  | -   Coordinate the efforts of the developers      |
|                  |                                                   |
|                  | -                                                 |
|                  |                                                   |
|                  | -                                                 |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| General users    | -   Software to perform a task at a reasonable    |
|                  |     > cost                                        |
|                  |                                                   |
|                  | -   Software that is easy to install              |
|                  |                                                   |
|                  | -                                                 |
|                  |                                                   |
|                  | -                                                 |
|                  |                                                   |
|                  | -                                                 |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| IT professionals | -                                                 |
|                  | -                                                 |
|                  | -                                                 |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| Users with       | -                                                 |
| disabilities     | -                                                 |
|                  | -                                                 |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| Software         | -                                                 |
| distributors and | -                                                 |
| system trainers  | -                                                 |
|                  | -                                                 |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------+

You probably noticed that neither the open source approach or the
proprietary approach meet all of the needs of the stakeholders. Can you
create another approach that would do a better job?
