---
title: "Transparency Module"
author: "TODO"
date: "2021-06-29"
output:
  blogdown::html_page:
    toc: true
    fig_width: 6
    dev: "svg"
---

Transparency Module

Module Summary

 

**Ethics background** required: Basic understanding of virtue ethics,
analogy, utilitarian, and deontological ethical frameworks is helpful,
but they will be briefly reviewed in the module.

**Subject matter** referred to in this module: Software, e-commerce,
and/or social media user agreements.

**Placement** in overall ethics curriculum:

> Academic year: Years 2-4 Software Engineering or other Software design
> course

            Recommended previous modules: Year one curriculum covering
ethical frameworks is helpful.

> Recommended follow-up modules: Algorithmic Bias module also refers to
> transparency, so this is a nice introduction to that module, or the
> Algorithmic Bias module could be the lead-in

**Time** required:

In class: 30 minutes

An online version is also included* *along with a peer review assignment

**Learning objectives**:

-   Learn about what makes user agreements often lacking in transparency

-   Consider what can be done about lack of transparency, weighing pros
    and cons of the solutions

-   Practice critical thinking, and articulating observations

-   Review and apply the virtue ethics, analogy, utilitarian*,* and
    deontological ethics models

**Module overview**:

[Ethical issues to be considered]{.ul}: Transparency

Transparency has become an issue in computing lately including
transparency in how an AI makes decisions or how a predictive algorithm
produces recommendations. This module focuses on end user licensing
agreements. Such agreements are required for user and company safety,
but are often unread. Using online tools, students explore the actual
complexity of such agreements, consider solutions, and contemplate how
to discuss the solutions with their superiors.

 

[Exercise flow:]{.ul}

-   Students are polled regarding the reading of software/e-commerce
    site user agreements

-   Students consider the definition of transparency and evaluate the
    transparency of user agreements from student-chosen sites using
    readability metrics

-   Students brainstorm and evaluate solutions to the difficult user
    agreements

-   Students practice making an argument about the ethicality of a
    complex user agreement

**Preparation:**

-   Read entire module

-   Find a user agreement yourself and test it using the tool found here
    as you will be asking your students to do:
    <https://readabilityformulas.com/freetests/six-readability-formulas.php>

-   Take a glance at the bullet-pointed user agreements found here**:**
    <https://tosdr.org/>

-   There are no student handouts for this module, but students will
    need laptops or tablets.

**If this module is to be presented online**

-   See online addendum. Students go through assignment and then
    peer-review the assignment of another student.

Instructors Guide

**Lesson plan**

[Introduction (5 min)]{.ul}

Ask students to respond to: "How many of you completely read all user
agreements presented to you online before clicking 'I agree'?" If few or
no one raises their hand ask "how many completely read 50% of them?"
"How many of you completely ignore all of them?"

Most students these days will admit to clicking without reading. Even if
students don't admit this, studies show that most people (91%) routinely
accept online agreements without actually reading them \[1\]. The next
question to ask students is "Why?" Why do we accept without reading?

Possible answers:

-   They are too long

-   They are too hard to read

-   I want access to the product so I need to agree regardless of
    whether I want to so why bother reading them

Ask students which sites/software products they have had to sign user
agreements for and make a list that is available for all students to
see. (perhaps Facebook, Instagram, Snapchat, Microsoft Windows, Amazon
App etc.)

[Activity (15 min)]{.ul}

**Read or summarize to students:** One of the ethical issues that
computing professionals have to consider today is transparency.
Transparency can be defined as: "Representing data, algorithms, or any
information that affects a user in an open, explicit, and easily
comprehensible format"

Readability scales exist today that rate the accessibility of documents
to people of various educational backgrounds based on such factors as
the length of a document, the length of sentences, and the complexity of
the words used. One such scale, the Flesch-Kincaid readability test is
actually built into word processors such as Microsoft Word. At the time
of this writing, a website that ranked documents using several different
tools could be found at the following URL:

<https://readabilityformulas.com/freetests/six-readability-formulas.php>

**Assign groups of 2-3 students to find** and evaluate (using tools
found on the web or a word processor) end user license agreements
(sometimes called EULAs) for one of the sites the class listed earlier.
It is probably best to actually assign these so there is not overlap.
The job of the students will be to summarize to the class the difficulty
ratings, and statistics about the number of words in the agreement.

Example:

When the Instagram EULA was pasted into the tool from
readabilityformulas.com, the following information was some of the
output:

Grade Level: 14

Reading Level: difficult to read.

Reader\'s Age: 21-22 yrs. old (college level)

Total \# of words: 1093

Average \# of syllables per word: 2

Percent of 3+ syllables in text: 21%

Once all teams have reported, and the difficulty results (maybe age
group and education level) have been written next to the site name on
the list created in the introduction, discuss the transparency of each
of these user agreements. Consider who the intended audience would be
(Instagram, for example, expects users to be 13+ and yet the reading
level is 21+)

[Reflection (10 minutes)]{.ul}

**Read or Summarize to the students:** Imagine that you are close to
finishing a software project that you have managed and that you have
seen the user agreement that is supposed to be attached to the product.
It is long and clearly written for those with a college level English
proficiency. However, the software product is expected to be used by a
segment of the US population where 50% of the users do not claim English
as their native language.

You believe that this user agreement is unethical. Because you were
introduced to ethical frameworks in college, you immediately recognize
that this document violates the virtue of transparency, and go to your
supervisor with that argument. The supervisor's response is that the
legal team does not see transparency as a virtue -- they see protecting
their company as a virtue. So much for the Virtue Ethics argument.
Furthermore, there is no rule in the company against using fancy
language. So much for an argument from the deontology (rules-based)
framework! That leaves you with two ethical frameworks with which you
are familiar to argue your point. Recall the two frameworks that remain:

-   Analogies: Arguing the ethicality of a situation based on a similar
    situation where the ethicality of the similar situation was widely
    accepted

-   Utilitarianism: Arguing the ethicality of a situation based on what
    is best for the majority

Which would you choose and how would you use it?

**Have students work in their groups** to come up with the most
compelling argument they can using one of the frameworks. You might have
the class vote on the best argument!

Possible answers:

**Utilitarianism** is probably the easiest choice since it might be hard
to find analogy. A clear and concise user agreement would be good for
the masses. However, it might not protect the company sufficiently.
Lawsuits are rampant. It might be helpful to include a longer agreement
in plain English along with an "executive summary". Examples of
"executive summaries" can be found at <https://tosdr.org/>. This is an
organization dedicated to clarifying what the user agreement really
means. See sample page below.

**An analogy** might be an agreement signed by a patient prior to
surgery. Most agreements require the patient to understand the risks and
agree to arbitration. In this situation, the patient (or representative)
is asked many times, if they understand and if they agree. The medical
personnel try to state the main risks in a few clear sentences. (This is
similar to the above suggestion about an executive summary). Often the
patient must agree to arbitration for any issues that do arise.

**Ask students:**

Regardless of what you choose, the company still needs to be protected.
User Agreements were put into place in part to protect the company. Can
you make a recommendation as to what they should use instead of using
the current agreement? Is there a way to make the agreement more
user-friendly?

**For the professor:**

A search for articles provides other suggestions for dealing with a
necessary but more user-friendly user agreement. One such article is
found at this link:
https://www.mindtheproduct.com/improving-ux-terms-conditions-page-6-easy-ways/

Their ideas include:

• Add a table of contents with links to each section

• Use a large font so it is easy to read

• Include an FAQ page

**Additional information to provide for the class:**

A sample of the service mentioned in the Utilitarianism argument.

![](media/image1.png){width="4.0472222222222225in"
height="3.713888888888889in"}

Students might be interested in this article, which claims that plain
language contracts on becoming more popular

<https://hbr.org/2018/01/the-case-for-plain-language-contracts>

\[1\] "A Solution to Unreadable Online User Agreements", *The Wall
Street Journal*, Alexandra Samuel

Sept. 18, 2018. Retrieved 5/28/20 from
https://www.wsj.com/articles/a-solution-to-unreadable-online-user-agreements-1537322760

[Assessment: (to be used on future quiz or exam)]{.ul}

-   Which virtue(s) does a complex user agreement violate?

    -   Transparency, for sure, but maybe also honesty or dignity

-   What was one method suggested for making user agreements more
    accessible?

    -   Table of contents, FAQ page, Executive summary, Plain English

-   What was an argument in support of the lack of ethicality of the
    hypothetical complex user agreement made by classmates that used
    either the Utilitarian or Analogies frameworks?

    -   Answers would depend on your particular class

Online Transparency Module

A 2017 study showed that most people (91%) routinely accept online
agreements without actually reading them \[1\]. What about you? Do you
regularly read online agreements prior to clicking "agree"?

If not, why not? If you, yourself, do read them, why do you think that
others avoid reading them? Give at least three reasons.

One reason that you might have listed is that they are too long and
complex. This is not your imagination. Consider the Instagram end user
license agreement (EULA). When the EULA was analyzed by software that
ranks a document for complexity, the results indicated that the
agreement was written at the level of understanding for a second year
college student. Yet, the expected user population of Instagram is ages
13 and above.

Check this out for yourself. Find a user agreement for a web or
app-based product (other than Instagram) and copy it. Then paste it into
the textbox of the tool found at the following url and click Check text
Readability:

<https://readabilityformulas.com/freetests/six-readability-formulas.php>

What EULA did you analyze?
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

You will see results from several tools. Record below a summary of the
average grade level, reading age, and text difficulty of the agreement
that you analyzed.

User agreements that are too complex can violate the virtue of
transparency. If you have studied the Virtue Ethics ethical framework in
the past, you know that the ethicality of a situation or decision is
judged by the virtues that it either conflicts with or upholds.

Assume that you are working as a software engineer and have just seen
the EULA for a product that you are working on. You believe that it is
too complex and therefore unethical. You make the case to your
supervisor on the basis that it conflicts with the virtue of
transparency. The supervisor's response is that the legal team does not
see transparency as a virtue -- they see protecting their company as a
virtue. So much for the Virtue Ethics argument. Furthermore, there is no
rule in the company against using fancy language. So much for an
argument from the deontology (rules-based) framework! That leaves you
with two ethical frameworks with which you are familiar to argue your
point. Recall the two frameworks that remain:

-   Analogies: Arguing the ethicality of a situation based on a similar
    situation where the ethicality of the similar situation was widely
    accepted

-   Utilitarianism: Arguing the ethicality of a situation based on what
    is best for the majority

Which framework would you choose and how would you use it? What would
your argument be that the user agreement is unethical?

Regardless of what you choose, the company still needs to be protected.
User Agreements were put into place in part to protect the company. In
recent years, people have suggested ways to make more user-friendly
agreements. These include:

-   Include an executive summary

-   Include a table of contents with links to the various user-agreement
    features

-   Write the agreement in plain English instead of legalese

-   Include an FAQ page

Choose one of the suggestions above (or another of your own) and list at
least one positive and one negative to that approach.

\[1\] "A Solution to Unreadable Online User Agreements", The Wall Street
Journal, Alexandra Samuel Sept. 18, 2018. Retrieved 5/28/20 from
https://www.wsj.com/articles/a-solution-to-unreadable-online-user-agreements-1537322760

Peer Review Assignment for online Transparency Module

1.  What EULA did your peer analyze?
    \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

2.  How did the results of that analysis compare to yours? Was this EULA
    more of less complex? Provide numbers for comparison.

3.  What ethical framework did your peer choose to argue that the
    complex user agreement in question was unethical?
    \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

> Comment on the strength of their argument. Would it convince you? Why
> or why not?

4.  What suggestion for the increased user-friendliness of EULAs did
    your peer reflect upon? Do you think that the positive that they
    listed for that suggestion would be a compelling argument for using
    it? Why or why not?
