---
title: "Virtue Ethics"
author: "TODO"
date: "2021-06-29"
output:
  blogdown::html_page:
    toc: true
    fig_width: 6
    dev: "svg"
---

Virtue Ethics

# Overview

 

**Ethics background** required: None

**Subject matter** referred to in this module: Computer Programming

**Placement** in overall ethics curriculum:

         Academic year: First year, first semester, probably
introductory programming course

         Recommended previous modules: A First Look at Ethics in
Computer and Data Science

         Recommended follow-up modules: Analogies* *

**Time** required:

> Out of class: None

         In class: 20-30 minutes

**Learning objectives**:

-   Students further understand how the virtue ethics framework works

-   Students practice applying the virtue ethics framework to scenarios

-   Students learn to articulate which virtues might shape decisions and
    actions using the virtue ethics framework

-   Students consider how virtues are developed as positive character
    traits

**Overview**:

[Ethical issue to be considered]{.ul}: Several scenarios related to a
computer programming course

[Exercise flow:]{.ul}

-   Students are reminded of what a virtue is

-   Students are reminded of what the virtue ethics framework is

-   Activity: Students work in small groups to determine how a virtuous
    person would respond in four different scenarios

-   Reflection: Groups compare notes on virtuous responses and ponder
    how/why their ideas may differ

 

**Preparation required:** Read the entire module. Print a copy of the
student handout for each student in the class. Have a copy of the
professor "answers" available in case you need them.

Instructors Guide

**Lesson plan**

[Introduction]{.ul} (to be read or summarized to class) (3 minutes)

Virtues can be defined as character traits---qualities that impact how
we feel, think, and act that we can cultivate through intentional
practice, and that in turn shape our practice and action. Virtues are
good character traits. We might usefully distinguish virtues as moral
qualities of a person---from personality traits that are not
specifically moral. For example, being an optimistic person or an
extrovert, or having leadership qualities or aptitude for higher math
might often be beneficial or good traits to have, but they are not
necessarily moral traits (i.e., they can be used to do bad actions,
accomplish bad ends, or lead to personal corruption). Virtues are traits
like kindness, wisdom, justice, and faithfulness---qualities of
character that, as the Greek philosopher Aristotle put it, make people
good and make their action good too (*Nichomachean Ethics* ii.6).

Since the virtue ethics framework asks the question "what would a
virtuous person do" to determine what is right, if we want to use this
framework it is important to look at these positive character traits and
understand how they might inform the decisions of a virtuous person.

You will be considering several scenarios and trying to determine how a
virtuous person would respond. You will have the opportunity to list
which virtues you think would most influence the response.

[Activity (7-10 minutes)]{.ul}

>  

Pass out papers with scenarios or point them to the scenarios you have
posted online. Allow students to consider the four scenarios either as
individuals or in small groups (3-4 students). Groups are probably best
if it is possible and they can be kept small.

[Reflection (to be completed in class after the activity is finished)
(10 minutes)]{.ul}

In this module, students are asked to openly discuss virtues. To
encourage authentic engagement with the material and each other, you may
need to state some guidelines on expectations of peer-to-peer
interaction. Here are two suggestions from "Guidelines For Classroom
Interactions", the Center for Research on Learning & Teaching,
University of Michigan,
[[http://crlt.umich.edu/examples-discussion-guidelines]{.ul}](http://crlt.umich.edu/examples-discussion-guidelines).

1.  **Understand that your words have effects on others.** Speak with
    care. If you learn that something you have said was experienced as
    disrespectful or marginalizing, listen carefully and try to
    understand that perspective. Learn how you can do better in the
    future.

2.  **Understand that others will come to these discussions with
    different experiences from yours.** Be careful about assumptions and
    generalization you make based only on your experience. Be open to
    hearing and learning from other perspectives.

With these guidelines in mind:

-   As time allows, consider each scenario as a class and have groups
    share their thoughts. (here are some ideas to help you prepare to
    lead the discussion)

    -   Professor made very hard assignment

        -   Professor could be honest about what she heard and ask for
            suggestions from students on how to handle the situation
            (virtues: hospitality, humility, transparency)

    -   Friend asks for help at last minute

        -   Student helps as much as possible during the hour left, but
            makes sure that the work is that of the student. Encourages
            friend to turn in what they have, and offers to meet several
            days beforehand next time to help friend understand the
            assignment (virtues: integrity, compassion, patience,
            kindness)

    -   Last minute question for Lab Assistant

        -   Lab assistant looks at the error and suggests several
            concrete ways that the student could find it for themselves
            (print statements, debugger, check spelling etc.) (virtues:
            integrity, compassion, professionalism, respect)

    -   Heavy workload with grumbling students

        -   Virtuous student could figure out how much actual time is
            spent and iron out which complaints are valid and which are
            not. Could come up with ideas on how to learn the material
            in a way that is less cumbersome. Could suggest approaching
            the professor with evidence of the valid complaints (average
            number of hours spent on work, evidence that book is not
            helpful). Virtues: patience, integrity, respect, initiative,
            honesty

-   It is quite possible that students will reach different conclusions
    about what a virtuous person would do, and will have different
    virtues that support their conclusions. Consider with the class what
    to make of this.

    -   Are some virtues to be ranked more highly?

    -   **This discovery also should lead to mentioning that a single
        ethical framework might not be enough. That is why we will be
        looking at other frameworks**.

-   Ask the class if they think they would naturally respond in a
    virtuous way or if it would be hard. If some believe it would be
    hard, ask why.

    -   Possible answers: I'm not that good of a person, I wouldn't want
        someone to be mad at me, my peer group would laugh at me.

**To be read or summarized:** We are not born with virtues, we develop
them over a lifetime through practice, imitating role models, and
reflecting on how the world around us forms our character. Would you
like to be more like that moral hero who comes to mind?

Virtue ethicists suggest a number of ways to cultivate virtue and good
character. Before I share some of them, what ideas do you have? (give
students time to suggest some)

-   Repeated intentional action. Deliberately set out to create new
    habits. Structure your environment to give you reminders and make
    your new practices easier and create reminders and rewards
    periodically to keep yourself on track.

-   Join a community of people who already have and exercise this
    virtue.

-   Find a role model who has this virtue and spend time with that
    person, paying attention to their assessments and reactions to
    situations. What goods do they notice? What values move them to
    action? What considerations weigh (or don't weigh) in their
    decision-making? What daily habits show them practicing that virtue?
    \[This can also work with historical or fictional persons if you can
    read about them at length.\]

-   When you have to act, imagine what your role model would do or would
    counsel you to do (or get that person's actual advice if you can).

[Assessment]{.ul} (to be included later on a quiz, paper, or exam to
determine if learning objectives were reached)

-   Ask students to define "virtue."

    -   Morally positive character traits

-   Ask students to describe how the virtue ethics framework could be
    applied to an ethical dilemma. You could provide a particular
    dilemma, or ask the students to provide an example.

    -   

-   Ask students to reflect on two different virtues and indicate which
    (if either) they think is more important and why.

    -   Honesty and compassion, for example -- not looking for a
        "correct" answer, but just their reasoning and articulation
        effort

-   What are some of the challenges of using the virtue ethics framework
    alone

    -   Relative importance of virtues differ between people

    -   Sometimes hard to find the 'better of 2 difficult choices'

 

**\
**

**Virtue Ethics Handout**

Virtues can often be different depending on the society that is
considering them. Below you will find a list of virtues often revered by
those in North America. This is clearly not an exhaustive list. You may
want to add to the list yourself.

Adaptability

Attentiveness

Authenticity

Commitment

Compassion

Contentment

Cooperation

Courage

Excellence

Faithfulness

Frugality

Generosity

Gentleness

Gratitude

Honesty

Hope

Hospitality

Humility

Inclusion

Integrity

Initiative

Justice

Kindness

Love

Loyalty

Mercy

Moderation

Open-mindedness

Patience

Perseverance

Piety

Professionalism

Provide for others

Quality

Reliability

Respect

Self-discipline

Self-sacrifice Service

Sustainability

Tact

Transparency

**Directions:**

Think about each of the following scenarios and determine how you
believe a virtuous person would respond. It might help to think about a
person, real or fictional, who you would consider to be highly moral and
decide how they might act. Then, try to determine which virtues
(character traits) would be most likely to influence them to act that
way.

-   A professor has made a new assignment that is more difficult for
    > students than she expected. She finds out by overhearing them
    > before class how much time they spent on it and how frustrated
    > they were. If she is a virtuous person, how should she respond?
    > What action should she take?

> What virtues will guide her as she assesses and responds to this
> situation?
>
> Virtues =

2.  A student has a good friend who comes to him 1 hour before a program
    > is due asking for help. The student finds out that the friend has
    > not actually started the program yet. The professor has made it
    > clear that programs are to be a student's own work. What does the
    > virtuous student do?

> What virtues will guide him as he assesses and responds to this
> situation?
>
> Virtues =

3.  A Lab assistant is just about to finish his office hour. His
    > professor has told him that she can't pay him for more than that
    > one hour. The lab assistant also has some assignments to finish up
    > for his own work. A student shows up with a syntax error that she
    > just can't fix. What does the virtuous TA do?

> What virtues will guide him as he assesses and responds to this
> situation?
>
> Virtues =

4.  A professor has assigned way too much homework for several weeks in
    > a row. All of the students are complaining to each other about it.
    > What, if any, action should a virtuous student who is aware of
    > this situation take?

> What virtues will guide her as she assesses and responds to this
> situation?
>
> Virtues =
