---
title: "Core Values Module"
author: "TODO"
date: "2021-06-29"
output:
  blogdown::html_page:
    toc: true
    fig_width: 6
    dev: "svg"
---

Core Values Module

Module Summary

**Ethics background** required: None

> This module is designed to help students identify their values and how
> choices may reflect those values.

**Subject matter** referred to in this module: None

**Placement** in overall ethics curriculum:

Academic year: First semester of first year. Good first semester module.

Recommended previous modules: Why Ethics? Module

Recommended follow-up modules: Virtue Ethics with Coding Scenarios
Module

**Time** required:

Out of class: None (but potential online version available if unable to
do in class)

In class: 20 minutes

**Learning objectives**:

By the end of this module, students will be able to

-   identify their own values

-   recognize others may have different values

-   articulate a value and its application to decision making.

**Module overview**:

[Ethical dilemma or issue considered]{.ul}:

> This is an introductory module. The module is designed for students to
> reflect on their values, articulate what might influence a choice and
> introduce the awareness that others may hold different values. The
> discussion centers on how a future workplace is chosen (not really an
> ethical dilemma).

[Exercise flow]{.ul}

-   Students read what a value is

-   Students select 20-25 values from a list of values

-   Students choose values that might influence the choice of a future
    job

-   Students share with a group of 3-6 two of the values that would
    influence a job choice and why

-   Students reflect on how others choices were different from their own

**Preparation:**

> Read the entire module. Print out enough copies of student handouts
> for entire class. Handout is attached at the end.

**If this module is to be presented online**

See online addendum. Student go through the same assignment, post their
top two values that they have put W's next to and describe how that
value would influence a job choice for them. Next, the students need to
read each other's posts and discuss anything that surprised them.

**Side note:**

In this module, students are asked to openly discuss their personal
values. To encourage authentic engagement with the material and each
other, you may need to state some guidelines on expectations of
peer-to-peer interaction. Here are two suggestions from "Guidelines For
Classroom Interactions", the Center for Research on Learning & Teaching,
University of Michigan,
<http://crlt.umich.edu/examples-discussion-guidelines>.

1.  **Understand that your words have effects on others.** Speak with
    care. If you learn that something you have said was experienced as
    disrespectful or marginalizing, listen carefully and try to
    understand that perspective. Learn how you can do better in the
    future.

2.  **Understand that others will come to these discussions with
    different experiences from yours.** Be careful about assumptions and
    generalization you make based only on your experience. Be open to
    hearing and learning from other perspectives.

Instructors Guide

**Lesson plan for face-to-face: (modifications for online or blended;
see online addendum)**

[Introduction]{.ul} (to be read or summarized to class)

Your experience in college should help prepare you for your next steps
in life. That means that you will increase in knowledge. At this
university, we also are concerned that you learn to apply that knowledge
in a way that is beneficial to society. Sometimes it is hard to decide
what will be beneficial and what will not. To that end you will be
presented with opportunities to learn about ways to approach decision
making when faced with an ethical dilemma and to practice using those
approaches. This short exercise will ask us to think about what we value
and apply that knowledge to decision-making. In later modules, we will
learn about different frameworks for understanding societal values (aka
ethics) and practice using them in making ethical decisions.

[Activity]{.ul}

-   Distribute the values handout to students.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Instruct students to read the definition of what a value is. Ask one
    or more students to define "value" in their own words. (3 minutes)

-   Instruct students to circle their top 20-25 values from the list of
    values provided (3 minutes)

-   When most students are finished (2-3 minutes), instruct students to
    put a W next to the circled values that might inform where they
    would choose to work when they graduate.

-   When most students are finished (1-2 minutes), instruct students to
    form groups of 3-6. Ask each student to share with their group 1-2
    of their values labelled with a W and why that value would influence
    their work choice. Provide an example. On example might be that
    flexibility is important so that student might not want to work for
    a company that requires strict start and finish times.

[Reflection (to be completed in class)]{.ul}

Ask each group to report to what degree answers differed within the
group (2-5 minutes)

Ask several students to share with the class an answer provided by a
groupmate that surprised them or caused them to reconsider what values
might be important in choosing a future work place. (2-5 minutes)

Ask students if they can think of an example where it would be important
to understand the values of others. One example might be if a person on
a team valued punctuality and the team meetings always started late.
That could cause irritation on the part of the punctual team member.
(2-5 minutes)

[Assessment]{.ul} (to be included later on a quiz, paper, or exam to
determine if learning objectives were reached)

-   What is a value?

    -   Students will probably refer to one of the definitions given on
        the handout

-   Why is it important to understand what we value?

    -   Understanding what we value can help in deciding between choices

-   Why is it important to understand what others value?

    -   Understanding what others value can help make teams more
        cohesive, help make products better, demonstrate respect, etc.

-   Give an example of a choice in your life that reflects one (or more)
    of your values.

Values Survey

Please fill out questions 1-3.

**What is a value?**

"A value is something you are willing to act on" Ayn Rand, philosopher

"Values are a matter of what guides you through every day, every task,
every encounter with another

human being." Richard Bolles, *What Color is Your Parachute*

"a preference that is felt and/or considered to be justified -- morally,
by reasoning, or by aesthetic judgments, usually by two or all three of
these" Sarah Spiekermann: *Ethical IT*

**Question 1: Write the definition of "value" in your own words:**

**Question 2: Identify your values:** Begin by circling the values in
the list below that are **most** important to you. (One way to start to
do this is to look back on your life to identify when you felt good or
confident about a choice. For example, learning to play a sport,
instrument or some other skill that involve practice- then maybe you
value physical activity, competition or challenge. ) Try to choose 20-25
top values.

{{% multicolumn %}}

Achievement

Advancement

Adventure

Appreciation

Attentiveness

Authenticity

Autonomy

Balance

Beauty

Being the best

Belonging

Challenge

Compassion

Competition

Consistency

Contentment

Creativity

Curiosity

Decisiveness

Dependability

Dignity

Diversity

Education

Enjoyment

Entrepreneurship

Environmental Protection

Equality

Fame

Family

Financial security

Flexibility

Freedom

Fun

Generosity

Gratitude

Growth

Happiness

Harmony

Health

Honesty

Hospitality

Humility

Humor

Inclusivity

Individuality\
Independence

Influence

Innovation

Integrity

Intelligence

Justice

Kindness

Leadership

Leisure

Listening

Love

Loyalty

Making a difference

Mastery

Mercy

Open-mindedness

Originality

Patriotism

Peace

Physical activity

Power

Privacy

Problem solving

Professionalism

Punctuality

Quality

Recognition

Relationships

Reliability

Resourcefulness

Respect

Rigor

Risk-taking

Safety

Security

Sensitivity

Self-expression

Service

Simplicity

Spirituality

Stability

Status

Success

Teamwork

Tenacity

Tolerance

Transparency

Trustworthiness

Usefulness

Vision

Wealth

{{% /multicolumn %}}

**Question 3:** After you have circled your 20-25 top values, put a W
next to the circled values that might inform where you would choose to
work when you graduate.

When everyone in your group has finished, each person should choose two
of the values that they have put W's next to and describe to the group
how that value would influence a job choice for you.

Online Alternative Values Survey

On your own, complete questions 1 -- 3.

**What is a value?**

"A value is something you are willing to act on" Ayn Rand, philosopher

"Values are a matter of what guides you through every day, every task,
every encounter with another

human being." Richard Bolles, *What Color is Your Parachute*

"a preference that is felt and/or considered to be justified -- morally,
by reasoning, or by aesthetic judgments, usually by two or all three of
these" Sarah Spiekermann: *Ethical IT*

**Question 1: Write the definition of "value" in your own words:**

**Question 2: Identify your values:** Begin by circling the values in
the list below that are **most** important to you. (One way to start to
do this is to look back on your life to identify when you felt good or
confident about a choice. For example, learning to play a sport,
instrument or some other skill that involve practice- then maybe you
value physical activity, competition or challenge. ) Try to choose 20-25
top values.

<div style="columns: 3">

Achievement

Advancement

Adventure

Appreciation

Attentiveness

Authenticity

Autonomy

Balance

Beauty

Being the best

Belonging

Challenge

Compassion

Competition

Consistency

Contentment

Creativity

Curiosity

Decisiveness

Dependability

Dignity

Diversity

Education

Enjoyment

Entrepreneurship

Environmental Protection

Equality

Fame

Family

Financial security

Flexibility

Freedom

Fun

Generosity

Gratitude

Growth

Happiness

Harmony

Health

Honesty

Hospitality

Humility

Humor

Inclusivity

Individuality\
Independence

Influence

Innovation

Integrity

Intelligence

Justice

Kindness

Leadership

Leisure

Listening

Love

Loyalty

Making a difference

Mastery

Mercy

Open-mindedness

Originality

Patriotism

Peace

Physical activity

Power

Privacy

Problem solving

Professionalism

Punctuality

Quality

Recognition

Relationships

Reliability

Resourcefulness

Respect

Rigor

Risk-taking

Safety

Security

Sensitivity

Self-expression

Service

Simplicity

Spirituality

Stability

Status

Success

Teamwork

Tenacity

Tolerance

Transparency

Trustworthiness

Usefulness

Vision

Wealth

</div>

**Question 3:** After you have circled your 20-25 top values, put a W
next to the circled values that might inform where you would choose to
work when you graduate.

**Question 4:** Post two of the values you placed a W by and write two
sentences about how those values would influence a job choice for you.

(Questions 5- 6, can be completed in a discussion board format or
individual assignment)

**Question 5:** Read the posts from other students in the class. Find a
post that is similar to your values. Find a second post, that is
different that your values. State how they are different and similar.
Does either post surprise you why or why not?

**Question 6:** Consider the two posts you cited in question five. If
you worked with the individual with the post similar to yours, what
might be the benefits of working with this person? What could be the
deficits?

If you worked with the individual with the post different to yours, what
might be the benefits of working with this person? What could be the
deficits?

\*If your course is a blended format, you could follow up in class with
question 6 as a small group discussion.
